===== page_114 =====
_~ Surface contaminant

ZX Embedded particle

FIGURE 6.1 Wafer Contaminants

Cleanroom Background

When semiconductor manufacturing began nearly half a century ago, the need to control contami-
nation was evident. Early cleanrooms were based around local clean zones, with clean benches used
by operators wearing smocks and gloves. The introduction of the high-efficiency particulate air fil-
ter (HEPA filter) in the 1960s was a first step toward significant particulate reduction in the wafer
fab. The HEPA filters delivered clean air at the workbench to efficiently move particles away from
the product.

Modern semiconductor manufacturing is performed in a sophisticated facility known as a
cleanroom. This is a wafer fabrication facility that is isolated from the outside environment and free
from contaminants such as particles, metals, organic molecules, and electrostatic discharge (ESD).
When we say free, that means that these contaminants are not detectable at the detection level of
the most advanced test instrument. A cleanroom represents the comprehensive set of procedures and
practices that are followed to ensure a wafer fabrication facility is contamination-free for semi-
conductor manufacturing.

Wafer Fab Cleanroom
(Photo courtesy of
Advanced Micro
Devices)

TYPES OF CONTAMINATION

Contamination in semiconductor manufacturing is any undesirable substance introduced to the
semiconductor wafer that impacts the production yield or electrical performance of a microchip.
Since our interest is wafer manufacturing, we will focus on the various types of surface contami-
nation introduced during the manufacturing process.


===== page_115 =====
Contamination often leads to a defective chip. Killer defects are those causes of failure where
the chip on the wafer fails during electrical test. It is estimated that 80% of all chip failures at elec-
trical test are due to killer defects from contamination.! Failure at electrical test results in a yield
loss, causing the defective die on the wafer to be scrapped (thrown away) at a significant cost to the
chip manufacturer.

Cleanroom contamination is grouped into five categories:

@ Particles

@ Metallic impurities

@ Organic contamination

@ Native oxides

@ Electrostatic discharge (ESD)

Particles

Particles are small objects that can adhere to the surface of a wafer. Airborne particles suspended
in the air are referred to as aerosols. The relative size distribution of various particles from pebbles
down to atoms is shown in Figure 6.2.2

IK Cloud particles >
L Lo? tmospheric dus?>|
Size of single sand >
molecules 4 mz >
of matter Thin smoke _ Pebbles
|
| | |
10-7 10-6 10-5 104 103 10-2 io 1 10
Millimeters

FIGURE 6.2 Relative Size of Particles

Problems From Particles Mf For semiconductor manufacturing, our objective is to control and
reduce wafer exposure to particles, Particles can cause defects during the wafer fabrication process
leading to open or bridged circuitry. They can create an electrical short between adjacent con-
ductors. Particles also can be sources of other types of contamination, as discussed in the following
section.

Defect from Particles
(Photo courtesy of
Advanced Micro
Devices)

The rule of thumb for an acceptable particle size in semiconductor manufacturing is that it must
be less than one-half the minimum device feature size.? Particles larger than this size will cause killer
defects. For example, a 0.18-pm feature size cannot be exposed to 0.09 jm and larger particles. To

115


===== page_116 =====
appreciate these dimensions, consider that a human hair is about 90 j.m in diameter. A dimension of
0.18 zm would be about 500 times smaller than the human hair (see Figure 6.3).

‘

The relative size of the human hair is
approximately 500 times the size of
the smallest feature size on an
integrated circuit.

Minimum IC feature size = 0.18 um

Line
ie Wisth Space

A small example ofa segment
Cross section of human hair from a larger integrated circuit.

FIGURE 6.3 Relative Size of Human Hair to 0.18 jm Particle Size

The particle density on a wafer surface represents the number of particles in a given area. A
higher particle density produces a higher chance of a killer defect. The number of particles above a
certain critical size that are added to a wafer surface at an operation is termed the particles per wafer
per pass (PWP). In the early days of semiconductor manufacturing, skilled operators visually in-
spected wafers for particles using simple tools such as a microscope. However, this approach is un-
acceptable for the VLSI and ULSI eras. Since the mid-1980s, particle detection has been widely
done by scanning the wafer surface with a laser beam and detecting the position and intensity of the
scattered light caused by particles (see Figure 6.4). The smallest detectable diameter of current
particle-detection equipment used in production is roughly 0.1 jzm.4

Initial particle count
before the wafer is
inserted in process tool.

Initial particle count after
the wafer passes through
the process tool.

Particles are added to the
wafer by the process tool.

FIGURE 6.4 Particles Per Wafer Per Pass on a Wafer

Semiconductor manufacturing in the ULSI era also requires stringent control of a wide range of
airborne molecular particles, including water vapor, acid vapors, hydrocarbons, and gases that add im-
purities to the wafer surface. The measurement of airborne molecular contamination at the ppb level is
now becoming standard for advanced fabrication facilities. Molecular compounds include metals,
nonmetals, and organic and inorganic contaminants, all of which are damaging for device performance.

Metallic Impurities

Contamination in a wafer fab also can come from metal compounds. The typical metal impurities
damaging to semiconductor processing are the alkali metals that are found in many common chem-
icals and processes. These metals are strictly controlled in all materials used in a wafer fab (see

when tole wie

nse Sade ncn Fa sh


===== page_117 =====
Table 6.1).5 The alkali metals are from Group IA of the periodic table and are extremely reactive
elements because they give up one valence shell electron, thus forming a cation that reacts with a
nonmetal anion to form an ionic compound.

TABLE 6.1 Typical Metal Impurity Elements

Heavy Metals Alkali Metals
Jron (Fe) Sodium (Na)
Copper (Cu) Potassium (K)
Aluminum (Al Lithium (Li)
Chromium (Cr)
Tungsten (W)

Titanium (Ti)

Metals come from chemical solutions or different process steps during semiconductor manu-
facturing. The process of ion implantation (discussed in a later chapter) exhibits the highest metal
contamination, on the order of 10!2 to 1013 atom/cm2.® Another source of metallic contamination is
through reaction of the chemicals with the transport piping and containers. For instance, carbon
monoxide gas, used as an additive gas to improve various wafer processes, can react with the nickel
in stainless steel, gaskets, and other components of the gas delivery system.’ From this reaction gas-
phase carbon monoxide forms nickel tetracarbony! particles that are then distributed on the wafer
surface. These particles can be redistributed into the bulk wafer and lead to increased device defects.

There are two basic ways for metallics to deposit on a wafer surface.® In the first way, metal
binds to the silicon surface by the charge exchange between a metallic ion and a hydrogen atom lo-
cated on the wafer surface. These types of metallic impurities are difficult to remove. The second
way metal is deposited on the wafer surface is when the surface oxidizes and metallic impurities
are located in the oxidation layer. For this reason cleanliness is critical in oxidation processes (see
Chapter 10). Metallic impurities in an oxide layer are removed only by removing the oxide from
the wafer surface.

Metallic ions are highly mobile in semiconductor materials and are referred to as mobile ionic
contaminants (MICs). When introduced into a wafer, MICs move throughout the silicon and seri-
ously damage the device’s electrical performance and long-term reliability. Sodium is typically one
of the most prevalent MICs in untreated chemicals, with people as its greatest carrier. The human
body contains a high percentage of sodium in the form of fluids (e.g., saliva, tears, perspiration, and
so on). Sodium contamination is rigorously controlled in wafer fabs.

It is hard to imagine how mobile an MIC material is in silicon. Consider an MIC such as
sodium. A single crystal of table salt (NaCl) contains enough sodium to deposit one quadrillion
(10!) atoms of sodium per square centimeter on 5,000 wafers (150-mm diameter) and therefore de-
stroy all chips on the wafers.

Problems From Metallic Impurities Ml Metallic impurities lead to reduced device yield in semi-
conductor manufacturing, including structural defects in the oxide-polysilicon gate structure.?
Additional problems include increased leakage currents at a pn junction and reduced minority car-
rier lifetime. MIC contamination can migrate to the oxide-silicon interface in the gate structure and
alter the threshold voltage required to turn on a transistor (see Figure 6.5 on page 118). Because
they are so mobile, metallic ions can move around a device long after electrical test and shipment
and cause the device to fail during usage. A major goal of semiconductor manufacturing is to min-
imize exposure to metallic impurities and MICs.

Organic Contamination

Organic contaminants ate those that contain carbon, nearly always bonded to itself and to hydro-
gen, and sometimes to other elements as well. Some sources of organic contamination are bacteria,
lubricants, vapors, detergents, solvents and moisture. Equipment used in wafer fabs today is de-
signed with components that require no lubricant, for example, oil-free pumps and bearings,


===== page_118 =====
Jonic contamination alters the electrical
characteristics of a transitor.

Conduction
of electrons

+Vq

FIGURE 6.5 Mobile lonic Contaminant Altering Threshold Voltage

Problems From Organic Contaminants Ml Trace organic contaminants degrade the integrity of
the gate oxide material under certain processing conditions.! Another problem with organic mate-
tials on the surface of semiconductor wafers during processing is incomplete cleaning of the sur-
face. This condition permits contaminants such as metal impurities to remain intact on the wafer
surface after cleaning.

Native Oxides

The surface of a silicon wafer will oxidize if exposed either to air at room temperature or to DI
water that contains dissolved oxygen. This thin oxide layer is termed native oxide. The initial
native-oxide growth on a silicon wafer occurs in the presence of moisture. When the wafer surface
is exposed to air, several tens of molecular layers of moisture adsorb on the wafer within a second.
Oxygen from the room is dissolved into the adsorbed moisture layer on the wafer surface and pen-
etrates into the silicon surface. This process causes the silicon surface to oxidize even at room tem-
perature. The thickness of the native oxide increases as exposure time lengthens.

Problems From Native Oxides M@ A silicon surface that is native oxide-free is important for
semiconductor performance and reliability. Native oxide interferes with other process steps, such as
the growth of single-crystal film on the wafer or the growth of the ultrathin gate oxide.!! Native
oxide also includes some metallic impurities, which can move into the silicon wafer and cause elec-
trical defects. !2

Another problem created by native-oxide growth occurs in contact regions for metal conduc-
tors, Contacts make electrical connections between interconnect wiring and the source and drain re-
gion of the semiconductor device. If there is a native-oxide layer, then this will increase the resist-
ance of the contact and reduce and perhaps even prevent current flow (see Figure 6.6).!3

Native oxide lines the bottom of the contact hole, creating poor
electrical contact between tungsten and the doped silicon region.

; ; i. L Active region Tungsten plug — Oxide insulates
Native oxide grows inside in silicon the contact,
the contact hole prior to
tungsten deposition.

FIGURE 6.6 Native Oxide


===== page_119 =====
Native oxide requires removal through a cleaning step with a mixture of HF acid (see the sec-
tion on wet cleaning later in this chapter). Another approach to inhibiting native oxide is to inte-
grate multiple process steps into a multichamber tool with an evacuated, high-vacuum chamber so
that the wafers are not exposed to ambient atmosphere and moisture.

Electrostatic Discharge

Electrostatic discharge (ESD) is a form of contamination because it is an uncontrolled transfer of
static charge from one object to another that potentially damages the microchip. ESD is generated
when two materials with differing static-charge potential are touching or rubbing each other (this
action is referred to as triboelectricity). Atoms with excess negative charges are attracted to adja-
cent atoms that have an excess of positive charges. This attraction creates a discharge of electricity
that can be up to tens of thousands of volts.

Semiconductor manufacturing is especially prone to developing static electrical charges be-
cause the wafer fab is maintained at a low humidity, typically 40% + 10% relative humidity (RH).
This condition is conducive to the generation of high levels of static charge.!4 Although increasing
the RH would decrease static-charge generation, it would also increase contamination through
corrosion, thus making it an impractical approach.

Problems From Electrostatic Discharge MH Although the amount of static charge transferred
during ESD is usually small (on the order of nanocoulombs), the discharge deposits its energy into
a very small area of the wafer. An electrostatic discharge that occurs in a few nanoseconds can gen-
erate peak currents over 1 amp, literally vaporizing metal conductor lines or punching through
oxide layers.!> This discharge also can be the cause of gate oxide breakdown. Another significant
problem with ESD is that once a wafer surface has a charge buildup, its resulting electric field can
attract charged particles or polarize and attract neutral particles to its surface (see Figure 6.7). An
example of this is how a TV screen attracts dust particles. Furthermore, the smaller the particle, the
more effect the electrostatics have on particle attraction.!® As device critical dimensions are re-'
duced, smaller particles attracted by ESD become more significant and can create killer defects. In
order to minimize particle contamination, wafer charging must be controlled.

\ FIGURE 6.7 Particles Attracted to a Charged Wafer
( i


===== page_120 =====
SOURCES AND CONTROL OF CONTAMINATION

The wafer fab cleanroom is stringently controlled for contamination to reduce killer defects that im-
pact microchip performance. Nearly anything that comes in contact with a wafer is a potential
source of contamination. Seven sources of contamination in a wafer fabrication facility are:

@ Air

@ Humans

® Facility

® Water

@ Process chemicals

@ Process gases

@ Production equipment
Air
The most fundamental concept of a cleanroom is the control of particles in the wafer fab air. The
air that we normally breathe is not acceptable for semiconductor manufacturing because it contains
excessive airborne contaminants. These small airborne aerosol particles float and remain in the air
for a long period of time, depositing on wafers as contamination and creating killer defects.

The class number designates the air quality inside a cleanroom by defining the particle size
and density in the cleanroom air. This figure represents how well particles are controlled to reduce
particulate contamination. Class numbers originated from Federal Standard 209, first released in
1963 and revised several times until the most recent version of 209E (see Appendix B). Table 6.2

shows the number of acceptable particles per cubic foot for the different cleanroom class numbers
and particle size.

TABLE 6. 2 Definition of Airborne Particulate Cleanliness Classes Per Federal Standard 209E_

Sos Odd fl 03pm

1 3.50 X 10 7.70 3.00 1.00

10 3.50 X 102 7,50 X 10 3.00 x 10 1.00 x 10!

100 7.50 * 102 3.00 X 102 1.00 x 102

1,000 1.00 x 103 7.00
10,000 1.00 x 104 7.00 X 10
100,000 1.00 x 105 7.00 X 102

If the cleanroom class is stated only by the number of particles, such as a cleanroom of class
1, then assume a particle size of 0.5 wm. This means there is a maximum of one particle of size 0.5
uum or larger per cubic foot. For particle sizes different from 0.5 jm, the cleanroom class should be
expressed as the class number at a specific particle size. Examples are: class 10 at 0.2 um (read
from Table 6.2 as a maximum of 75 particles per cubic foot at 0.2 um or larger) and class 10 at 0.1
pm (a maximum of 350 particles per cubic foot at 0.1 jum or larger).

Ultrafine Particles I There recently has been usage of a class 0.1, with particle sizes down to
0.02 to 0.03 zm. The latest clean air standard also has a provision for the number of ultrafine par-
ticles in a cubic meter of air, which is called the “U” descriptor. The U descriptor specifies ultrafine
particles as those smaller than 0.1 4m in diameter, down to the smallestdiameter detectable with a
discrete particle counter. Without referring to a specific particle size, the U descriptor defines clean-
liness as U(x), where (x) is the maximum allowable number of ultrafine particles per cubic meter
of air.


===== page_121 =====
\
\

Contamination Control in Wafer Fabs

Humans

A human is a particle generator. People continually enter and leave cleanrooms and are the greatest
sources of contamination in a cleanroom.!” Particles come from hair and hair products (hair spray,
gel), lint from clothes, flakes of dead skin, and so on. On the average, a person sheds over one ounce
of particles per day, which can amount to an astonishing 10,000,000 particles per minute of 0.3 wm
size and larger (see Table 6.3).

‘

TABLE 6.3 Particles Emitted by Human Activities

Source of Particles Average Number of Particles
per Minute > 0.3 jum
Motionless (sitting or standing) 100,000
Moving hands, arms, trunk, neck, and head 500,000
Walking at 2 miles per hour 5,000,000
Walking at 3.5 miles per hour 7,500,000
Cleanest skin (per square foot) 10,000,000

Simple activities in the wafer fab such as opening and closing doors or excessive movements
around process tools create particulate contamination. Normal human activities such as talking,
coughing, and sneezing are damaging to semiconductors.

Cleanroom Garments Mf To attain ultraclean conditions in a cleanroom, humans must follow
certain procedures, known as cleanroom protocol, and be covered with special cleanroom garments
(also referred to as a “bunny suit”). The garment is made up of a hood with a facemask, coveralls,
boots, and gloves, and will completely cover the body. The goal of the cleanroom garment system
is to meet these functional criteria:

@ Total containment of body-generated particles and aerosols.
@ Zero particle release from the garment system.

@ Zero electrical-charge buildup for ESD.

@ No release of chemical or biological residues.

Technician in
Cleanroom Garment.
{Photo courtesy of
International
SEMATECH)

121


===== page_126 =====
Cleanroom materials such as carts, cassettes, equipment, and so on must be static dissipative.
This term means that the resistivity of the material is lowered through the use of conductive addi-
tives, permitting mobile electrostatic charges to flow. through the material. At the same time,
people and objects in the cleanroom must be continuously connected to ground. In this manner,
electrostatic discharge is conducted through the human body and all cleanroom materials that the
wafer comes in contact with and flows harmlessly away from the product through ground. This
setup avoids potentially discharging through a device on a wafer and causing irreparable damage to
the chip.

Air Ionization. The wafer has various insulating materials placed on it during processing,
such as an oxide film. These materials are easily charged and will hold this charge for a long pe-
riod. Since this insulation material is in intimate contact with the product, it requires a method to
neutralize the charge buildup. The most common way to neutralize insulating materials on a wafer
is with air ionization. Special ionizer emitters located on the ceiling in the cleanroom produce a
high electric field that ionize the air molecules and make it conductive by gaining or losing an elec-
tron. When this conductive air contacts a charged surface, such as an insulator material on a wafer,
the surface attracts ions from the opposite polarity and neutralizes the electrostatic surface charge
(see Figure 6.13).

Air ionization by emitters can be limited because many ions are eliminated before reaching
the wafer surface due to recombination. A recent development is air neutralization using soft-X-ray
radiation. Exposing the ambient air surrounding the charged wafer to soft X-rays will generate
large ion pairs. This process effectively neutralizes the charge on the wafer surface to 0 volts after
roughly two seconds.

High voltage
supply ionizer

Ceiling filters

FIGURE 6.13 Neutralizing Static Charge on a Surface with Air lonization

Water

To manufacture semiconductors, a high quality, ultrapure deionized (DI) water (sometimes referred
to as UPW) is required in large quantities. City water has too many contaminants to be acceptable
for the production of wafers. DI water is the most heavily used chemical in semiconductor manu-
facturing, primarily in the chemical wafer cleaning solutions and as a postclean rinse. It is estimated
that current DI water consumption in a wafer fab runs up to 2,000 gallons of ultrapure deionized
water for each wafer produced in a modern 200-mm process line.2


===== page_127 =====
Unacceptable contaminants in ultrapure DI water are:

@ Dissolved ions

@ Organic materials
@ Particulates

@ Bacteria

@ Silica

@ Dissolved oxygen

Figure 6.14 shows different water particles and their sizes.27

|

acteria

Ton particles

i

cast

Chay, silt >

0.0001 0.001 0.01 Ol 1 10 100
Microns

FIGURE 6.14 Size of Particles in Water

Dissolved ions in water are from minerals such as sodium and potassium that easily form
ions, An example is salt (NaCl) that breaks up into Nat and Cl” ions. These mobile ionic contami- |
nants (MICs) are undesirable and create performance problems in semiconductor devices.

Organic materials, referred to as total organic carbon (TOC), are the sum of all carbon-
containing compounds dissolved in the water. These organic contaminants have a damaging
effect on the ability to grow oxide films.

Bacteria are live, reproducing organisms in the water. Fragments shed by bacteria are known
as pyrogens. Bacteria found in water lead to defects in oxidation, polysilicon, and metal-
conducting layers. Some bacteria contain phosphorus that could cause uncontrolled doping.

Silica is found in city water as finely suspended particles. These particles range in size from
ten angstroms to ten microns. A high silica content fouls filtration equipment in the water purifica-
tion equipment and also decreases the reliability of thermally grown oxides.

Another type of contaminant in water is dissolved oxygen. It creates a problem because it
leads to native-oxide formation on the wafer surface. Dissolved oxygen in water also creates prob-
lems if the water is pressurized as it is in some semiconductor processes. When the water is de-
pressurized, dissolved gases may come out of solution forming bubbles that can cause incomplete
water wetting on the wafer surface.”®

DI-Water Installation M& A DI-water installation has two major parts for purifying water, referred
to as the makeup loop and the polishing loop (see Figure 6.15 on page 128).29 The makeup loop re-
moves particles, total organic carbons (TOCs), bacteria, microorganisms, ionic impurities, and total
dissolved minerals from the raw water. It has a prefilter that removes particles above one
micron and a purifier section for removal of ionic impurities, bacteria, and dissolved gases. The
polishing loop is the final part of the water purification system that removes the remaining
contaminants,

Deionization Ml Water deionization to make DI water is the process of removing the electrically
active salt ions using specially manufactured ion-exchange resins. This process changes the water
from a conductive medium to a resistive medium with a resistivity of 18 megohm-cm (18,000,000
ohm-cm) at 25°C. DI water used in the wafer fab is referred to as 18-megohm (MQ) water.
Ultrapure DI water is passed through two deionizers, once in the makeup loop and another time in
the polishing loop.


===== page_130 =====
Process Chemicals

Liquid chemicals used in semiconductor processing must be free of contamination for successful
device yield and performance. Chemical purity ig identified by an assay number, which describes
the percentage of a particular chemical in the container (without reference to other substances pres-
ent). For example, an assay of 99.99% for a bottle of hydrofluoric acid means the bottle contains
99.99% hydrofluoric acid and 0.01% other substances.

Filters are used to prevent chemical degradation during delivery or to maintain chemical pu-
rity during a recirculation step. Filters should be located at appropriate locations (e.g., near input to
the gas controller) and as close to the process chamber as possible through point-of-use filtration.
The different filter classes are:

Particle filtration: Depth-type filtration (see Figure 6.19) for particles from approximately 1.5
microns and larger.

Microfiltration: Membrane filtration of a liquid that removes particles in range of 0.1 to 1.5
microns.

Ultrafiltration: Pressure-driven membrane process that rejects large molecules from approxi-
mately 0.005 to 0.1 microns.

Reverse osmosis: Also called hyperfiltration. A pressure-driven solution process which trans-
ports liquid through a semipermeable membrane with the exclusion of particles and metal
ions as small as approximately 0.005 microns.

A membrane filter uses a thin membrane of polymer or ceramic with small penetrating pores
as the filter medium (see Figure 6.20). The size and distribution of the pores are controlled through-
out the membrane. The membrane serves as a barrier that permits the passage of materials only up
to a certain size or shape as defined by the pores. It is also called a surface filter because it removes
particles from the air stream through interception at its surface. Membrane filters are used in reverse
osmosis, microfiltration, and ultrafiltration. A membrane filter is often used as a point-of-use filter
and is placed just before the process tool to provide final filtration. :

A good filter will not create a significant pressure drop of the required flow, will not intro-
duce secondary contamination, and will be compatible with the chemical. The filter efficiency is the
percentage of particles of a specific size and above that are stopped in the filter. For liquid filters in
a ULSI process, a typical efficiency rating for a membrane filter is 99.9999999% of 0.02 micron
particles and above (referred to as nine nines efficiency). :

FIGURE 6.19 Depth-Type Filter FIGURE 6.20 Membrane Filter
(Used with permission from International (Used with permission from International
SEMATECH) SEMATECH)

Process Gases Ml The delivery and use of ultraclean gas is critical for semiconductor manufac-
turing in the ULSI era. However, the handling and delivery system can introduce impurities that
adversely affect the yield of semiconductor devices. Gases pass through purifiers and gas filters to
remove impurities and particles. Some gas filters are all-metal (e.g., nickel) that do not shed parti-
cles or outgas organic contaminants. These filters have a nickel membrane that is able to withstand
the corrosive gases with a proven efficiency for particles as small as 0.003 microns. Other gas fil-
ters are made of a Teflon polymer.

ace Sam

Bion ate” og @ abeh OE,

Manse rs

sess dob»?

ek tee

atm “esta we waddle

1p nahh natn pane CA nStanticre Sian be Roaatiedha en oR lam. Mace tebe

efor SHRMELE Gy. Bb State oa

sch Pitot seh oN


===== page_131 =====
Production Equipment

The production equipment used to manufacture the semiconductor wafer is the most significant
source of particles in a wafer fab.2* During the wafer fabrication process, silicon wafers are re-
peatedly loaded from cassettes into tools, processed through multiple equipment operations, un-
loaded back into cassettes, and then transported to the next workstation. This sequence occurs over
and over for the 450 or more process steps necessary to fabricate a wafer, exposing the wafer to a
multitude of mechanical and chemical operations at the different tools.

Many wafer fabrication operations occur in a vacuum, which requires special design consid-
erations to avoid contamination. Examples of different sources of particle contamination from
process tools are:

@ Flaking of by-products built up on chamber walls.
@ Automated wafer handling and transportation.
@ Mechanical operations such as shaft rotation and valve opening or closing.
@ Pumping and venting in vacuum environments.
@ Cleaning and maintenance procedures.
Since equipment automation means fewer humans interacting with the product, there is less
concern about particles from humans and more emphasis on reducing particles from equipment.?3

The number of particles on a wafer surface will increase during the fabrication process as the wafer
is exposed to more tool operations. This condition is shown in Figure 6.21.54

Clean

Clean

Clean

—>

Clean

Number of Particles

Number of Process Steps ——_--——>

FIGURE 6.21 Wafer Surface Particles as a Function of Process Steps

Workstation Design

The right materials for workstation design of process tools and general workstations are necessary
for achieving an ultraclean cleanroom. All materials emit some particles, but the goal is to reduce
the emission to an acceptable level. Smooth, highly polished surfaces are best to reduce particulate
contamination. Stainless steel has become a widely used material for work surfaces and equipment
in the cleanroom. When properly processed, stainless steel has a relatively low particle emission
rate. Electropolishing is a crucial finishing step.

Bulkhead Installation Ml Some fabs choose to install their equipment with a bulkhead equipment
layout. In this approach, the major portion of the equipment is located behind the production bay
fab wall in the service chase (see Figure 6.22 on page 132), Only the user-interface operator’s con-
trols and the wafer cassettes are located in the fab. This configuration isolates the equipment and its
servicing in the chase, which is typically at a lower-class level of contamination.


===== page_135 =====
WAFER WET CLEANING

Due to the continual reduction in critical dimensions on a wafer, the wafer surface must be clean
prior to undergoing processing. The most important way to control contamination on a wafer is to
prevent contaminating the wafer. However, once a wafer surface is contaminated, then the contam-
inant must be removed by cleaning.

The goal for wafer cleaning is to remove all surface contaminants: particles, organics,
metallics, and native oxides. Every wafer process step is a potential source of contamination to the
devices on the wafer. Throughout the entire ULSI fabrication process, it is estimated that the
surface of an individual wafer is wet cleaned up to 100 times.*®°

Wet-Cleaning Overview

The predominant wafer surface cleaning process is with wet chemistry. In the early 1980s, the con-
sensus was that wet cleaning would be replaced by dry cleaning methods by the turn of the century.
There has been a substantial effort to achieve this, but no completely successful replacement for
wafer wet cleaning has been found. Wet cleaning of wafers is thriving and is being improved to
attain more effective surface cleaning. The typical chemicals used in wafer wet cleaning and the
contaminants they remove are shown in Table 6.5.77

TABLE 6.5 Wafer Wet-Cleaning Chemicals


| Contaminant        | Name          | Chemical Mixture Description *(all cleans are followed by a DI water rinse)* | Chemicals          |


| ------------------ | ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ |


| Particles          | Piranha (SPM) | Sulfuric acid / hydrogen peroxide / DI water                                 | H₂SO₄ / H₂O₂ / H₂O |


| Particles          | SC-1 (APM)    | Ammonium hydroxide / hydrogen peroxide / DI water                            | NH₄OH / H₂O₂ / H₂O |


| Organics           | SC-1 (APM)    | Ammonium hydroxide / hydrogen peroxide / DI water                            | NH₄OH / H₂O₂ / H₂O |


| Metallics (not Cu) | SC-2 (HPM)    | Hydrochloric acid / hydrogen peroxide / DI water                             | HCl / H₂O₂ / H₂O   |


| Metallics (not Cu) | Piranha (SPM) | Sulfuric acid / hydrogen peroxide / DI water                                 | H₂SO₄ / H₂O₂ / H₂O |


| Metallics (not Cu) | DHF           | Hydrofluoric acid / water solution *(will not remove copper)*                | HF / H₂O           |


| Native Oxides      | DHF           | Hydrofluoric acid / water solution *(will not remove copper)*                | HF / H₂O           |


| Native Oxides      | BHF           | Buffered hydrofluoric acid                                                   | NH₄F / HF / H₂O    |


One of the most critical surface cleaning process steps during wafer fabrication occurs prior
to growing a thermal oxidation layer on the wafer. Ultrathin oxide layers must start with a com-
pletely clean wafer surface.

RCA Clean MB The industry standard wet-clean process is referred to as the RCA clean process,
developed by W. Kern and D. Puotinen at RCA in the 1960s and first published in 1970. RCA wet
clean consists of sequential immersion in two different chemical baths, Standard Clean I (SC-1)
and Standard Clean 2 (SC-2).

The chemical mixture of Standard Clean ] (SC-1) is NH₄OH/H₂O₂/H₂O (ammonium hy-
droxide/hydrogen peroxide/DI water). The three chemicals are mixed with a ratio range of 1:1:5 to
1:2:7. Standard Clean 2 (SC-2) is a composition of HCI/H₂O₂/H₂O (hydrochloric acid/hydrogen
peroxide/DI water), and is mixed in a ratio range of 1:1:6 to 1:2:8.38 Both of these chemical mix-
tures are based on hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) and are traditionally used at a temperature of 75 to
85°C, with a 10 to 20 minute exposure time.

Standard Clean I (SC-1). As seen in Table 6.5, the SC-I clean is an alkaline solution
capable of removing particles and organic materials. For particles, the SC-1 wet-chemical process


===== page_136 =====
works primarily, through oxidation of the particle or by electric repulsion.*9 To understand the oxi-
dation mechanism, realize that hydrogen peroxide is a powerful oxidizing agent that oxidizes the
wafer surface and the particle. The oxidation layer on the particle can provide a liftoff mechanism
that degrades and dissolves the particle, which breaks the adhesion forces between the particle and
the surface. The particle then becomes soluble in the SC-1 solution and leaves the surface. This ac-
tion is shown in Figure 6.26. This oxidizing action from the hydrogen peroxide also forms a pro-
tective layer on the silicon surface that keeps the particle from reattaching to the wafer surface.

(1) Particle attaches (2) Oxidation of silicon (3)Particle dissolves
to silicon, by H₂O₂ helps lift in SC-1 solution. -
particle,

FIGURE 6.26 Oxidation and Solubility of Particle in SC-1

The SC-1 particle removal mechanism actually achieves an electrical repulsion of a particle.
The hydroxide ion (OH⁻) from ammonium hydroxide (NH₄OH) slightly etches the wafer surface
and undercuts beneath the particle. The hydroxide ion also builds up a negative charge on the sili-
con surface and the particle. This negative charge on the particle and surface serves to repulse the
particle from the surface and move it into the SC-1 solution (see Figure 6.27). Another benefit of
the negative surface charge is that it prevents particles from redepositing.

(1) Particle attaches (2)HO⁻ from NH₄OH (3) HO⁻ builds up a negative
to silicon. etches surface. charge on the surface that
repels the particle away,

FIGURE 6.27 Particle Removal Through Negative-Charge Repulsion

Because the SC-1 step removes particles through an etching process on silicon, there is some
microroughening of exposed silicon. This microroughening is a concern because it makes it diffi-
cult to grow very thin oxidation layers required in ULSI technology. Another concern regarding the
use of SC-1 is a documented correlation between metal contamination on the wafer and the de-
composition of the hydrogen peroxide in the mixture.*° This contamination requires the bath to be
replaced frequently, which is undesirable because it increases the use of chemicals in the fab.

It should be noted that the buildup of a charge potential on the wafer surface and the particle
could be described by their zeta potential.*1 For particle removal, the zeta potential of the wafer and
particle should be in the same polarity direction in the solution in order to have repulsive electrical
forces between the wafer and particle.

Standard Clean 2 (SC-2). The SC-2 wet-clean process is used to remove metals from the
surface of the wafer. To remove metallic (and some organic) contaminants from the silicon surface,
it is necessary to have a solution with a high oxidation potential and low pH. In this manner, met-
als become ionized and dissolve in the acid solution that has a strong oxidizing action. Now the


===== page_137 =====
cleaning solution can capture electrons from the metallic and organic contaminants and oxidize
them. Metals are ionized to be dissolved in the solution while organic impurities are decomposed.

Modifications to RCA Clean Mf There have been modifications to the RCA clean process, mainly
because this process uses chemicals and ultrapure water in high volume and at high temperature.42
Very few chip manufacturers still use RCA clean in the same ratio as the original solution.
Companies now will use mixtures that are up to 100 times more dilute with ultrapure H₂O, referred
to as dilute cleaning chemistries, which achieves equal to or better cleaning effectiveness as the
original solution.43 For instance, a dilute SC-1 chemical ratio may be 1:4:50 for NH₄OH:H₂O₂:H₂O
instead of the traditional 1:1:5 ratio. Dilute chemistries are an improvement for safety and health,
plus they have the cost benefits of reduced chemical usage and disposal.

An important reason for the continued success of the RCA wet-clean is the availability of
ultrapure water and chemicals. New cleaning approaches such as point-of-use chemical generation
provide even higher levels of purity than ever before, which lead to more effective cleaning action.
RCA clean does generate a large amount of chemical vapor, increasing the load on the cleanroom
exhaust system to keep the chemical vapors from getting into the cleanroom. Another problem with ©
bath evaporation is its effect on changing the bath composition over time.

Piranha Mixture. Piranha is a strong cleaning solution that combines sulfuric acid
(H₂SO₄) and hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) to remove organic and metallic impurities on the wafer sur-
face. Piranha is used at different steps in the process, sometimes before the SC-1 and SC-2 clean-
ing steps. The most common mixture is seven parts of concentrated H₂SO₄ to three parts of 30%
(by volume) of H₂O₂. The usual cleaning method is to immerse the wafers in the piranha at 125°C
for about 19 minutes followed by a thorough DI-water rinse. A variation of piranha is Caro’s acid,
which is prepared by mixing 380 parts of concentrated H₂SO₄ with 17 parts of 30% H₂O₂ and 1
part of ultrapure water.

HF Last Step. Many cleaning steps expose the wafer surface to a last step of hydrofluoric
acid (HF) to remove native oxides on the wafer surface. Native oxide-free silicon is critical for pro-
ducing a high-purity epitaxy film and ultrathin (50 angstroms and less) oxide layers for the gate re-
gion of MOS circuits. After the HF exposure, the wafer surface is completely terminated with hy-
drogen atoms and has a high stability against reoxidation in air.4 A hydrogen-terminated silicon
surface is maintained in the same condition as if it were bulk silicon crystal.45

Chemical Vapor Cleaning. Another method used in a few fabs is a chemical vapor to re-
move residual oxide and metallic contamination from a single wafer in a process chamber. The
wafer is exposed to a fine mist spray of dilute HF:H₂O, followed by a Dl-water rinse and an IPA
(isopropyl alcohol) vapor-dry step. This method was developed to minimize HF chemical use, but
it is not widely used because the increase in cleaning performance is minimal.

Wafer Cleaning Steps @ A typical wafer cleaning sequence is shown in Table 6.6 on page 138.
There are variations where some of the HF/H₂O steps are omitted.


===== page_138 =====
TABLE 6.6 Typical Wafer Wet-Clean Sequence


| Cleaning Step               | Purpose             |


| --------------------------- | ------------------- |


| H₂SO₄ / H₂O₂ (Piranha)      | Organics and Metals |


| UPW rinse (ultrapure water) | Rinse               |


| HF / H₂O (dilute HF)        | Native oxides       |


| UPW rinse                   | Rinse               |


| NH₄OH / H₂O₂ / H₂O (SC-1)   | Particles           |


| UPW rinse                   | Rinse               |


| HF / H₂O                    | Native oxides       |


| UPW rinse                   | Rinse               |


| HCl / H₂O₂ / H₂O (SC-2)     | Metals              |


| UPW rinse                   | Rinse               |


| HF / H₂O                    | Native oxides       |


| UPW rinse                   | Rinse               |


| Drying                      | Dry                 |



Wet-Clean Equipment

Because of the extensive use of wet cleaning in semiconductor manufacturing, the type of equip-
ment used is a factor in reducing the chemical concentration and use of chemicals during wet clean-
ing. Traditional wet-clean processing has been done in wet sinks, consisting of a series of acid and
rinse tanks housed in fume hoods. Self-contained cleaning equipment with microprocessor controls,
robotic handling, and auto-dispensing of chemicals is common, The trend for wet cleaning and rins-
ing is for robotic handling of wafers with cassetteless operation within a minienvironment. Without
the cassette, there is less obstruction of chemical flow to the wafer surface. This condition can im-
prove the cleaning efficiency, reduce the amount of chemical usage, and lead to shorter rinse times.

Megasonics M One of the most widely used technologies with SC-1 for wet cleaning is mega-
sonic cleaning. Megasonic cleaning uses ultrasonic energy with frequencies near 1 MHz during the
clean process (see Figure 6.28). This process achieves much more effective particle removal at
lower bath temperatures (30°C versus the original 80°C). This fact is important because of the dif-
ficulty in removing smaller particles, simply because of the difficulty in delivering the necessary
force to such minuscule particle dimensions.*7

Energy-carrying solution

-~— Sonic energy

Megasonic +
transducer

—

To electronics control module

FIGURE 6.28 Megasonic Cleaning


===== page_139 =====
Megasonic cleaning is accomplished when the vibrations of a megasonic transducer creates
pressure waves in the liquid of the cleaning tank. The main particle removal mechanisms with
megasonic cleaning are cavitation (formation of bubbles) and acoustic streaming.*® Cavitation oc-
curs when the low-pressure portion of the pressure waves create small bubbles that become filled
with gas and/or vapor. These cavity bubbles oscillate through the liquid medium and violently col-
lapse (implode) due to the sonic energy. This collapsing action is cavitation, which enhances parti-
cle removal without damage to the silicon wafer.*? Acoustic streaming is the steady flow of liquid

' induced in the megasonic tank from the ultrasonic energy. Flowing liquid has more cleaning action
than stationary water because it transports the particles away from the surface.

When the vibration frequencies are less than 100 kHz, then the process is referred to as
ultrasonic. However, cavitation-induced pitting of silicon wafers occurs at ultrasonic frequencies
that have not been found in the megasonic frequency range (800-1200 kHz).°° Another reason for
megasonics becoming more widespread in chemical cleaning and subsequent DI-water rinse
operations is because it reduces the volume of chemicals required.

Spray Cleaning MB With spray cleaning technology, the wet-cleaning chemicals are sprayed onto
wafers, placed in a cassette and rotated inside a sealed chamber (see Figure 6.29). A DI-water rinse
is sprayed on the wafers after each cleaning step and the DI water’s resistivity is monitored to
determine when all the chemicals are removed. The spray chamber is sealed during the process to
isolate the chemicals and their vapors. After completion of the cleaning and rinsing cycles, the
chamber is purged with hot nitrogen and the spin rate is accelerated to dry the wafers.

Spray nozzle

ousing

FIGURE 6.29 Spray Tool Designs for Wafer Cleaning

An advantage of spray tools is a continuous supply of premixed, freshly blended chemicals
sprayed on the wafer. There is a physical force created during cleaning from the many small
droplets of the spray hitting the wafer with a high turnover of chemicals and rinse water. The use .
of spray and centrifugal force from the rotating wafer ensures effective rinsing at a reduced chem-
ical and water usage rate. There are also improvements in metallic and organic contamination re-
moval when using spin-spray technology. However, spray cleaning does not provide uniformity of
cleaning and rinsing because the center of the wafer is not turning at the high velocity of the outer
wafer edge. This problem becomes worse with larger diameter wafers.

Scrubbers @® Wafer brush scrubbing is an effective method for removing particles from the wafer
surface. Brush scrubbing is widely used following wafer chemical mechanical planarization
(known as CMP, which will be discussed in Chapter 18) due to the extensive particles generated
during CMP. Brush scrubbing is able to remove particles one micron in diameter and smaller.


===== page_140 =====
Early versions of wafer scrubbers made with nylon brushes damaged the wafer surface be-
cause of the stiffer nylon in conjunction with high pressure water sprays. Modern brushes are made
with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), which is a soft, compressible, spongelike material (see Figure 6.30).
PVA brushes are effective at removing particles without wafer damage.>! Brush scrubbers are avail-
able in a double-sided version that brushes both sides of the wafer at once. Brush scrubbers are
often used with room temperature solutions of nontoxic chemicals or DI water that is sprayed on
the wafer while brushing is underway.

UY Spray nozzle
Rotating

scrub brush

Cleaning solution or
Dl-water rinse

— Wafer motion

FIGURE 6.30 Wafer Brush Scrubber

Wafer Rinse Mf Chemical residues must be removed from the wafer after cleaning. Every
wet-clean process step is followed by an ultrahigh purity DJ-water rinse. This rinsing step requires
acontinuous supply of clean water to the wafer surface. The water rinse can also serve to end oxide-
etching action from an HF cleaning step.

Overflow Rinsers. Traditionally the most common type of DI-water rinse has been the
overflow rinser (see Figure 6.31). DI water is brought into the rinse system to flow through and
around the wafers, sometimes with a nitrogen bubbler to aid in the mixing of chemicals at the
wafer surface. The fluid motion in overflow rinsers serves to sweep away contaminants that have
diffused into the flow stream from the surface of the wafers. High flow rates with no dead spots are
goals for rinsing.

The overflow rinse process has also been applied to a cascade rinse system. In this case, the
DI water cascades between two or three overflow rinsers connected to each other. The wafers start

Single overflow Two-stage
with N» bubbler overflow
7 > @ * Overflow If 1 Th

Po & ovo,
ae og oO

il ignite

DI water =——!] pater =]
Nitrogen
Drain Drain

FIGURE 6.31 Overflow Rinser

meapad


===== page_141 =====
the rinse process in the downstream rinser and are moved sequentially through the rinsers to the first
one with the direct DI-water supply.

Overflow rinsers are the conventional system, but they consume a large amount of DI water.
Given the large amount of water used in semiconductor facilities, there has been extensive investi-
gation into alternative rinse processes that consume less water.

Dump Rinse. A common rinse method is the dump rinser. DI water is sprayed on the
wafers while filling the rinse tank, At a certain water level, a drain in the bottom of the tank quickly
opens and the water instantly dumps out (see Figure 6.32). The drain then closes and the cycle re-
peats for a set number of cycles. An inert gas, such as nitrogen, is often bubbled through the water
to aid in removing contaminants such as particles by creating a scrubbing action.

Wan

Boat with wafers rT
| Sea

PILLAI if
TIATLETUCEEEET

R I I | ‘~ Spray water in

+— Fill water in

FIGURE 6.32 Dump Rinse

Spray Rinse. A spray rinser is typically used in conjunction with wafer cleaning and
drying. It uses the physical force of the flowing water to dislodge residual chemicals on the wafer
surface.

Hot Di-Water Rinsing. Hot Di-water rinsing (70 to 80°C) has become widely used for
rinsing the wafer. The benefits of hot DI-water rinsing are that it aids in the removal of residual
chemicals (especially if some type of HF solution has been used) and it improves the performance
of the dry wafer. However, there has been some research that shows that the use of DI-water rinse
at elevated temperatures creates a problem with etching the silicon surface, leading to surface
microroughness.°* Surface microroughness is undesirable for the extremely thin films required in
ULSI technology.

Wafer Drying Mi. Given the amount of aqueous rinse in a wafer process, it is important to dry the
wafer, ideally with no drying spots. How a wafer responds to water refers to its wettability. Water
will either adhere to a clean hydrophilic wafer or bead up on a hydrophobic surface. A hydrophilic
surface has an affinity toward water, allowing water to spread across it in large puddles.
Oxide-coated and RCA-cleaned wafer surfaces are hydrophilic. A hydrophobic surface has an aver-
sion to water and does not support large pools of water. The water generally beads up, such as water
on a newly waxed car, and is called dewetted. Oxide-free surfaces that have been hydrofluoric acid
(HF) etched are hydrophobic due to the hydrogen-terminated surface. As the wafer undergoes pro-
cessing, semiconductors require a hydrophobic surface to promote adhesion during subsequent lay-
ering processes.>? Because HF-cleaned wafer surfaces are susceptible to contamination, there must

be an adequate effort to properly dry the wafer surface.
\

Spin Dryers. The spin dryer has been widely used in the past. A cassette of wafers is placed
in the spin equipment and high-speed rotation removes moisture while the wafers are being sprayed


===== page_142 =====
with heated nitrogen. However, there are problems, such as the difficulty of removing moisture in
holes and the generation of particulate contamination from the mechanism. In addition, the high-
speed rotation of the wafer causes a charge buildup, which attracts particles. Adding static elimina-
tors inside the equipment controls this static elebtricity buildup.

IPA Vapor Dry. In this process, wafer drying occurs through the displacement of water by
heated solvent vapors of isopropyl alcohol (IPA). This PA vapor dry method has a lower probabil-
‘ity of contamination from particles, but the purity level of the IPA must be controlled. The IPA is
heated in a tank with the wafers suspended in the vapor above the liquid level. When the wafers are
removed from the vapor dryer, the solvent vapors evaporate, leaving the wafer dry.

Alternatives to RCA Clean

There are several alternative cleaning technologies to RCA clean that have been researched and
used in varying degrees.

Dry Cleaning M Wet-cleaning methods are still meeting most cleaning requirements in wafer
fabs. Dry-surface cleaning techniques are implemented primarily in integrated cluster tools, rather
than stand-alone tools. Ultimately, the cost benefits through increased yield or reduced cost of own-
ership will decide the frequency of dry cleaning in wafer fabrication.

Plasma-Based Dry Cleaning. Plasma-based dry cleaning must be considered as a serious
alternative to wet clean. Today, dry-plasma technology is used for removing organic photoresist
from wafers (known as ashing), or as an integrated preconditioning step in process tools to remove
native oxides. In the plasma process, gases and plasma energy are used to cause the chemical reac-
tion that removes the contaminant (plasma processes will be discussed in detail in later chapters).

An example of plasma cleaning is a microwave downstream-plasma process.*4 This plasma
can remove film residues containing organic material plus metallic and other inorganic components.
The plasma can remove the sidewall film while minimizing removal of the underlying dielectric
layer. This plasma clean is followed by a DI-water rinse.

There will be further development and use of dry-plasma cleaning processes for semicon-
ductor manufacturing since the advanced processes required for 0.18-um critical dimensions and
below are using new materials with different forms of residues (within the same classes we have
defined). In many cases, the chemical reactions of wet cleaning do not possess enough activation
energy (energy required to cause a reaction) to remove all the residues. This is why the higher-
activation energies associated with plasma techniques and nonplasma methods are needed for
wafer cleaning.

Chelating Agents MA chelating agent binds and*removes metallic ions. If this agent, such as
ethylenediamine-tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) is added to a cleaning solution, it can reduce the redepo-
sition of metals in the solution. It does this by altering the reduction-oxidation potential of the
metallic species. An example would be adding a chelate to the ammonium hydroxide of SC-1 as a
means of preventing metals from any chemical impurities from adhering to the wafer surface.

Ozone M Ozone (O;) injected into ultrapure water has been identified as a possible replacement
for some RCA wet cleaning. It has been shown that a combination of ozonized ultrapure water fol-
lowed by an SC-2 cleaning step is effective in removing metals such as copper (Cu) and silver (Ag),
as well as organic contaminants.*°5 Research has indicated that ozone injected into DI water could
replace a piranha step used for light organic cleaning,

Cryogenic Aerosol Cleaning M The principle of cryogenic aerosol cleaning is to sufficiently
cool a gas (argon) to form solid ice particles that are injected onto a wafer surface to remove par-
ticulate contamination. The cooling of the argon is done by expansion cooling (lowering of pres-
sure) in a vacuum chamber as a mixture of argon and nitrogen flows through a jet nozzle array. The
nitrogen is used to dilute the argon and control the diameter of the solid argon particles. Research
data has shown that cryogenic aerosol cleaning can be superior to wet cleaning. A benefit of this
process is that it is environmentally benign. This process is not currently in wide use.


===== page_152 =====
In situ measurements are a recent development that were not very common even in the mid-
1990s. As equipment efficiency improvements occur, there will be more integration of in situ
metrology with fabrication equipment.

2

Data Management

Detecting defects is a challenge in IC fabrication because of shrinking feature sizes. The semicon-
ductor manufacturer must have a method of categorizing the defects, sorting between false and real
defects, and determining the root cause of each defect for determining the appropriate corrective
action. Defect analysis should differentiate between random or nonrandom causes and correlate
defect data with electrical and other tests to track how different defects affect wafer yield.

To a large degree, defect analysis is supported by an integrated software system. Large soft-
wate programs connect major measurement tools and provide the ability to set up sample plans,
analyze defect data, and detect trends amongst defects. Defects must be categorized in order to
conduct failure analysis. The most advanced metrology software has automatic defect classification
(ADC) to identify and classify defects based on software recognition patterns. Advanced defect
management software also catalogs wafers and images based on user-defined criteria and includes
statistical process control (SPC) capability for process monitoring and control.

QUALITY MEASURES

The breadth of metrology for IC fabrication is demonstrated by the many quality measures used
throughout wafer processing. Semiconductor quality measures define the requirements for specific
aspects of wafer fabrication to ensure acceptable device performance as measured by electrical tests
and device reliability. Major quality measures used in the wafer fab are shown in Table 7.2, in-
cluding the process areas where each measure is applicable. Semiconductor manufacturers specify
their particular wafer quality measures by stipulating the exact requirements for their products at
each process step. The manufacturer may specify other quality requirements beyond those listed in
Table 7.2.

TABLE 7.2 Quality Measures in Wafer Fabrication by Production Areas
Quality Measure Implant’ Diffusion Thin Films: — Polish Etch: Photo:
re “Metals: Dielectric BS

Film Thickness

1 vo

2 Sheet Resistance V Vv V

3 Film Stress Vv Vv V

4 Refractive Index Vv V

5 Dopant Concentration Vv V

6 Unpatterned Surface Vv Vv Vv V Vv Vv
Defects

7 ~~ Patterned Surface Defects V V
Critical Dimensions (CDs) Vv V

9 Step Coverage Vv V

10 Overlay Registration V

11 Capacitance-Voltage V

12 Contact Angie V

*The diffusion bay processes include: oxidation, deposition, diffusion, anneal, and alloy.


===== page_153 =====
Film Thickness

Since wafer fabrication is a layering process, there are many different types of films found on the
wafer surface throughout the fabrication process. Some of these different types of films are metal,
dielectric, photoresist, and polysilicon. The quality of these films is essential to a high-yield fabri-
cation process to produce reliable chips.

A critical quality parameter for films are their thickness. Film-thickness metrologies can be
divided into two general types: whether they measure opaque (i.e., light-blocking, such as metal)
films or transparent films. In some instances, such as for the gate oxide dielectric, the film thick-
ness must be measured with an accuracy of an angstrom (A) or less. Additional film quality
parameters are surface roughness, reflectivity, density, and lack of pinholes and voids.

Resistivity and Sheet Resistance Ml One of the most practical methods for evaluating thickness
for conductive films is to measure the sheet resistance, R,. To discuss R,, we need to understand
how resistivity is related to resistance in a thin film layer. Consider current flow through a square
sheet of conductive material, with the thickness, length, and width shown in Figure 7.2. Recall from
Chapter 2 that resistance, R, of a conductor is given as:

R= £0. (ohms)

Cross-sectional oa

area = wxt
FIGURE 7.2 Illustration of Square Thin Film
The cross-sectional atea is given by the product of width and thickness (w X t) and can be substi-

tuted in the equation for the area. Based on the assumption that the length (1) is the same dimension
as width (w), then / can be substituted for w. Making these substitutions yields:

ae)
R= wXt
_ PD
R= wxt
R, = £. (ohms/square, or 0/C))

Where,
R, = Sheet resistance in ohms/square
p = Film resistivity in ohm-cm

t = Thickness of film

Sheet resistance, R,, can be interpreted as the end-to-end resistance of a square sample of a thin
film on a wafer. It depends on the film resistivity and thickness. Sheet resistance is independent of the
size of the square film sheet. Measuring the sheet resistance between two points at the same distance


===== page_154 =====
apart on any size square of the same thickness will produce the same resistance. For this reason, the
units for R, are given as ohms/square (0/)). Dimensionally the units for R, are the same as ohms, but
ohms/square is typically used as a reminder that this is actually the resistance of a sheet of film. If the
thickness and sheet resistance are known, then the sheet resistivity, p,, can be calculated:

pP, = R,() — (ohms-cm)

The terms sheet resistance and sheet resistivity are sometimes used interchangeably since
they only differ by the thickness of the film. A tool used for measuring sheet resistance is the four-
point probe.

Four-Point Probe. Resistance cannot be practically measured on thin films with two sim-
ple probes, as usually done with multimeters commonly used by electronic technicians. This is be-
cause of excessive contact resistance at the contact interface between the probes and the wafer
material, In the semiconductor industry, a widely used method to measure sheet resistance is the
four-point probe, This method has four in-line probes equally spaced that touch the wafer surface
in a single file (see Figure 7.3). A known value of current (1) is passed between the two outer probes
and the potential difference (v) developed across the two inner probes is measured. This approach
avoids dealing with the effect of contact resistance.

The spacing between probes, s, should be less than the wafer diameter and less than the film
thickness. The resistivity of the film sheet is related to the four-point probe current and voltage by:

Vv
P, = T X 2as (ohms-cm)

Where, \

p, = Sheet resistivity in ohm-cm

V = DC voltage across the voltage probes (in volts)

I = Constant DC current passing through the current probes (in amperes)
S = Spacing between the probes

Constant current source

Wafer

FIGURE 7.3 Four-Point Probe

Resistivity measurements with a four-point probe can be reproduced to within + 2% if care
is taken in selecting instrumentation, and in determining probe pressure and current levels,? The
four-point probe is a nondestructive technique (e.g., the wafer does not have to undergo permanent
damage to perform the test). However, due to the potential for damage to the wafer from the probe
contacts, the semiconductor industry has moved toward noncontacting probes.? One contactless
method is the use of eddy-current probes. A high-frequency ac current flowing through a coil in-
duces eddy currents in conducting films placed under the coil. The eddy currents are a loss in en-
ergy that can be attributed to the loading effects produced by the resistance of the conducting film.
The resulting change in electrical energy can be measured and used in computing the value of the
sheet resistance of the film being measured.


===== page_155 =====
Sheet Resistance (Opaque Films) Ml Sheet resistance is used to indirectly measure the thickness
of opaque conductive films (e.g., metal, silicide, or semiconductor films) deposited on an insulator
substrate such as a silicon wafer. As ong as the film layer is large and the probe spacing is small,
the sheet resistance, R,, is given by:4

R, = 4.53 ~ (ohms/square, or 0/QO)

This formula is actually derived from the equation for sheet resistivity listed on page 154. The
constant 4.53 results from a correction factor based on the assumption of an infinitely large sheet
of film with small probe spacing. The correction factor can be modified to a different value if the
film sheet is not infinitely large.

Van der Pauw. A modification of the four-point probe is the Van der Pauw Method that
measures sheet resistivity with four probes on the periphery of an arbitrarily shaped sample (see
Figure 7.4). The concept is based on measuring electrical current on two corners of a square pattern
and measuring voltage on the other two. The results are the same as those achieved with the four-
point probe.

=>
@ Contact
(a) © Conductive material
CJ
[| a
s
(c) (d)

FIGURE 7.4 Van der Pauw Sheet Resistivity

Contour Maps. A practical benefit of sheet resistance measurements with the four-point
probe is that the technique can be done at many sites across a test wafer to provide contour maps
(see Figure 7.5). A contour map will typically present the data with a contour line showing the nom-
inal Q/Q and then deviations above and below this nominal value. The sheet resistance data results
from a predetermined number of measurement sites across the wafer.

Nominal value

FIGURE 7.5 Sheet Resistance Contour Map


===== page_156 =====
Ellipsometry (Transparent Films) M Ellipsometry is a nondestructive, noncontact optical
film-thickness measurement technique primarily used to measure thin, transparent films. It is the
leading method for film thickness metrology in the wafer fab.> The basic principle of ellipsometry
is to use a linearly polarized laser light source that, when reflected from the sample, becomes
elliptically polarized (see Figure 7.6). Polarized light consists of all light rays traveling in one plane.
Ellipsometry measures the shape of this reflected ellipse, and, based on known inputs such as the
angle of reflection, it accurately determines the film thickness. It is common in ellipsometry tools
for the angle of the incident light to be varied to provide more measurement samples that are opti-
mized for the film material. This practice is referred to as variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsome-
try (VASE). VASE has improved ellipsometry for measuring multilayer stack structures, which is
common in ULSI (see Chapter: 12 for a description of multilayer stacks).6

Quarter wave plate

Film being measured

FIGURE 7.6 ‘Basic Principle of Ellipsometry

Spectroscopic ellipsometry analyzes the polarization change of light over a wide spectral
range (spectroscopy uses the characteristic light wavelengths emitted by different materials).
Information about how the different wavelengths vary relative to one another after being reflected
from the film is very useful in a production environment because it makes ellipsometry sensitive to
different physical properties of the thin film. Ellipsometry is capable of measuring different types
of very thin films on the order of tens of angstroms thick.’ The types of films include dielectrics,
metals, and polymer coatings. The main requirement is that the film be transparent or semitrans-
parent. Fully automated thin film ellipsometry tools routinely measure gate oxide films < 40 A thick
with a repeatability better than 0.1%. Another example of ellipsometry measurements is sub-100 A
stacked oxide/nitride/oxide (ONO) film structures used in MOS capacitors with measurement re-
peatability in the 1% range. Thin metal layers (< 500 A) are considered semitransparent and can be
measured with ellipsometry. An example of a semitransparent metal layer is the thin copper seed
layer used in copper interconnects. Metal layers (> 1000 A) are generally considered opaque and
cannot be measured with ellipsometry.

Ellipsometry measurement-tool features such as small measurement spots, pattern-recognition
software, and high-precision wafer positioning hardware have made it possible to do many trans-
parent film process-control measurements directly on production wafers. This reduction in unpat-
terned monitor wafers has reduced process-control costs and increased ellipsometry efficiency.®
Ellipsometer tools are also being directly integrated into process tools for in situ (real time) meas-
urement applications in areas such as etch and planarization. Real-time thickness measurement is
desirable because it permits the process to define a precise endpoint of the film thickness during
runs for better accuracy and repeatability in film thickness.

Reflection Spectroscopy WM When light reflects off a surface, reflection spectroscopy (also re-
ferred to as reflectometry) is one of the three general types of optical measurement techniques, with
the other two being optical microscopy (discussed later in this chapter) and ellipsometry (see
above). Reflection of a structure is often used to characterize layer thickness for light-absorbing di-
electric layers on a nonabsorbing wafer substrate (see Figure 7.7). Based on the relationship of how
light reflects off the top and bottom surface of the film layer, reflectometry can be used to
compute the film thickness. An advanced reflection-spectroscopy technique utilizes a dual-beam


===== page_157 =====
spectrometer in order to give a clearer light signal for imaging. One light beam is used for
reflection measurements from the film layer, while the second light source provides a reference
source to correct for real-time lamp deviation or noise.

ert
Air . ‘7
Oxide i +

Silicon

FIGURE 7.7 Light Reflection from a Thin Layer

X-Ray Film Thickness Mf X-ray beams can be focused on a surface and used for making film
thickness measurements through a lesser-used technique known as X-ray fluorescence (XRF).
When X-rays strike a film, the absorption of radiation excites electrons in the film. The excited elec-
trons drop into a lower energy state, emitting X-ray photons (known as fluorescence) whose energy
represents the identity of the film atom. By measuring these X-ray photons, film thickness can be
determined (see Figure 7.8). A modification is to use total-reflection XRF (TRXRF), which uses a
small angle and reduces the amount of X-ray scattering to improve the measurement sensitivity.?

Irradiated Detector
X-ray Detector -

X-ray
fluorescence

Scattered
X-ray

Normal XRF method TRXRF method

FIGURE 7.8 Film Thickness Measured with X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF)

_A thin film’s X-ray reflectivity will vary depending on the angle of incidence and wavelength.
The reflectivity can be used to calculate the thickness and density of the film layer. It is difficult to
use X-rays to measure films with mixed compositions or film stacks with two or more layers.
X-ray fluorescence applies primarily to single-layer films.

Photoacoustic Technology M A recent development in metal thin film measurement is photo-
acoustics. This noncontact technology is based on light-induced sound pulses that generate an
acoustic pulse that is directed toward the film stack. When the acoustic pulse strikes the surface and
underlying film interface, an echo is created that bounces back toward the surface. This echo causes
a slight change in reflectivity that is detected at the wafer surface (see Figure 7.9 on page 158). The
time it takes for the pulse echoes to bounce back is used to calculate the film thickness.

This technique has a spot size of < 8 zm, which because of its small size, makes it capable
of probing structures on patterned wafers. It can measure film stacks with an individual layer thick-
ness down to < 20 A, which is critical as device scaling requires smaller structures for increased
Performance. !®


===== page_158 =====
Low output Nominal output

Pump laser beam

Optical
detector

Nominal output High output
Detection laser beam Detection laser beam

“Sa Change in surface
“1 reflectivity

FIGURE 7.9 Photoacoustic Film-Thickness Measurement
Redrawn from Solid State Technology, (June 1997), p. 86.

Film Stress

Highly localized film stress can be introduced during routine manufacturing processes into thin
films that may deform the substrate and create reliability concerns. The amount of this deformation
is measured with thin film stress measurement tools. Stress measurement is done by analyzing the
changes in the radius of curvature of the substrate resulting from the film deposition and applies to
all types of standard thin films, including metals, dielectrics, and polymers. The wafer radius is
measured before and after film deposition using either a scanning laser-beam technique or
split-beam laser technique to create a stress profile map across the wafer (see Figure 7.10).
Automated stress measurement tools have SMIF handling capability.

FIGURE 7.10 Detailed Stress Map of Wafer

Refractive Index

Refraction is the property of a transparent substance that addresses how much a light beam bends
as it travels through it (see Figure 7.11). Variations in the refractive index can indicate contamina-
tion in the film and lead to incorrect thickness measurements. The index of refraction for pure oxide
is 1.46. The index of refraction for thin films is measured by interference and ellipsometry tech-
niques with the same ellipsometer measurement tool used to determine thin film thickness.


===== page_159 =====
. sin 6; °
‘ Index of Refraction, n = —~
sin 0,
* Examples of n:
— air= 1.00
— SiO₂ = 146
— diamond = 2,12

one

de Air (a 8 10)"

FIGURE 7.11 Index of Refraction

Dopant Concentration

The performance of semiconductor devices is directly affected by distribution of dopant atoms in
the silicon in areas such as the formation of pn junctions, the epilayer, and the doping of poly-
silicon (see Figure 7.12). Modern processes employ dopant concentrations ranging from about
10'° atoms/cm2 to about 10!8 atoms/cm? (see Chapter 17).!! There are several techniques for
measuring the dopant concentration, or dose, of atoms in silicon. A common in-line method is the
four-point probe measurement, typically used for high-dopant concentration. The thermal-wave
system is also used in-line and is acceptable for low-dose readings. For off-line measurements,
secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS, described later in this chapter) with whole-wafer
positioning has recently been used as an alternative method for doping-concentration process
control.!” The capacitance-voltage test (described later in this chapter) can also be used to
characterize dopant concentration.

--- pn junctions

FIGURE 7.12 on Junction

The four-point probe method has been previously discussed in this chapter, and is used in the
same manner for dopant concentration as for sheet resistance (since sheet resistivity of the implanted
silicon layer is related to the dopant concentration). The contour mapping technique possible with the
four-point probe method is useful for routinely monitoring the implantation dose concentration.
Thermal-Wave System M A widely used method for monitoring ion-implant dose concentration
is the thermal-wave system. This method measures the lattice damage in the implanted wafer due
to ion implantation.!3 This is done by measuring changes in the wafer surface reflectivity from two
lasers focused on the same localized spot on the wafer (see Figure 7.13 on page 160). One laser
heats the wafer with a modulated Ar laser to create waves of heat (thus the term thermal wave). The
thermal waves cause a change in the reflectance of the other HeNe probe laser that is proportional
to the number of crystal defect sites in the wafer. A thermal-wave signal detector with calibration
data is used to characterize the implant process by correlating the amount of crystal damage to the
dopant concentration and other implant parameters.


===== page_160 =====
Thermal wave
signal detector

Pump laser
(Argon )

Probe faser
(HeNe)

FIGURE 7.13 Thermal-Wave System for Measuring Dopant Concentration

The thermal-wave system has become common for ion-implant monitoring because of its ease
_ of use and ability to be used on both patterned and unpatterned wafers. Its main disadvantage is that
it measures damage and therefore needs calibration curves to indirectly assess dopant concentration.

Spreading Resistance Probe Mi The spreading resistance probe (SRP) has been a metrology tool
in wafer fabrication since the 1960s and is used to measure both dopant concentration depth pro-
files and resistivity.!4 It is capable of profiling very shallow pn junction depths. The spreading re-
sistance probe has two carefully aligned probes that are moved in steps along a beveled wafer sur-
face, with the resistance between the probes measured at each step (see Figure 7.14). As the probes
pass through the junction, the probes sense the change in conductivity type (n or p). The sample
must be carefully prepared with a bevel angle, usually < 1°, which makes the SRP a destructive test.
As the probes step through the wafer bevel, the spreading resistance, R,,, of a flat circular contact
of radius r on a planar surface of semiinfinite material of resistivity p is given by,

p
Ry = ohms)
4 ¢

r

Probes

Direction of measurements ¥
Beveled surface

FIGURE 7.14 Spreading Resistance Probe (SRP)

The SRP employs calibration curves specific for a manufacturer’s instrument to overcome a
number of error sources associated with this measurement (e.g., silicon surface finish, contact re-
sistance, tip deformation, bevel surface preparation, and so on). Computer algorithms are used to
correlate the depth and resistance values to the dopant concentration at each level. The weak points


===== page_161 =====
of SRP are the need for skilled operators, the sample preparation, and the destructive nature of the
test. Its strong point is its ability to provide accurate dopant concentration measurements with no
junction-depth limitation.

Unpatterned Surface Defects

Unpatterned wafers are bare silicon wafers or wafers with various blanket films used as test wafers
and incorporated in process runs to provide a source of characterization information about process
conditions. The unpatterned wafer may be polished to a mirror finish or have a film that has a
rougher surface. After use in a process run, the unpatterned wafer is typically cleaned and reused,
which adds cost to the manufacturing process and reduces a company’s profit margin. Typical
defects inspected for on unpatterned wafers used for process monitoring include particles,
scratches, slip lines, and other material defects.

Defect-detection equipment for wafer-surface defects falls into two general categories: darkfield
and brightfield optical detection.!> Brightfield detection is the traditional light source for microscope
equipment—it examines the wafer surface for defects with directly reflected visible light. With bright-
field detection, horizontal surfaces reflect most of the light while slanted or vertical surfaces reflect
less. Darkfield detection examines light scattered off defects located on the wafer surface. This is done
by directing light to the wafer surface at a shallow angle through the outside of the optic’s objective
body (see Figure 7.15). This light impinges on the wafer surface and passes back up through the cen-
ter of the optics. This action renders all flat surfaces black, while irregularities appear as bright lines.
This fact makes darkfield detection useful for bringing out small defects on the wafer surface that
might be difficult to see with brightfield detection. An example of darkfield detection is seeing dust
particles in a ray of sunshine in a dark room. Both systems usually use some form of signal or image
processing to locate defects based on the light signal received from the wafer surface.

Brightfield imaging Darkfield imaging

Viewing optics

- nar Light reflected by
tf ii! surface irregularities

FIGURE 7.15 Darkfield and Brightfield Detection

Optical Microscopy ™ The optical microscope, or light microscope, has been used in science
since the seventeenth century. For semiconductor manufacturing, it has traditionally been one of the
most widely used methods of inspecting the wafer surface for defects such as particles and scratches.
The optical microscope provides low-magnification views of the wafer, typically less than 1,000X
magnification. Previously, optical microscopy was not capable of performing in the submicron
regime. With shrinking device geometries, the size of killer defects to be detected has decreased,
which has required the optical microscope to also improve over the years. Depending on the type of
optical system used, particulate defects down to a size of 0.1 ym are currently able to be detected.!®
Not all layers on a chip are critical in terms of dimensions, and in many instances it is necessary to
detect only gross defects. In this case, the optical microscope is quick and cost-effective.


===== page_162 =====
Wafer Inspection System
(Photo courtesy of Inspex)

Optical System. An optical microscope uses light reflection to detect surface defects. The
modern optical microscope is integrated into a wafer inspection station that includes robotic wafer
handling and software interface with video and defect classification. A typical optical system is
shown in Figure 7.16. Microscope manufacturers have achieved optical systems capable of detect-
ing smaller objects by improving the optics and using new light sources with shorter wavelengths
(the ability to detect smaller objects improves with shorter light wavelengths). The technology of
optics and light are discussed in detail in Chapter 14.

Phase and intensity

detection

Photo detector arra: -
y LJ Data generation, processing,

display are networked with
factory management software

‘|
-.; Split mirror

Video camera 4

Three-axis
piezo substage

Vibration isolation pad

FIGURE 7.16 Schematic of Optical System

asthe MBnent 4

bite HBS de Si hrenit tite iat

ater Ti ns iueltirant  wevadite,

am

soda ayes its
Sct Os


===== page_163 =====
An important parameter for optical microscopy is contrast, which is the ability to distinguish
between parts of an object. Techniques used in modern optical microscopes to enhance contrast are
brightfield and darkfield detection (described on page 161), confocal contrast, and color interfer-
ence contrast. A confocal contrast microscope uses a scanning technique to view a single point of
the object at a time, thus providing better image contrast and therefore better visualization of the
object (see Figure 7.17). A confocal microscope uses either visible light or laser scanning. Color in-
terference contrast splits a beam of light into a direct and a reference beam. The direct beam is
altered by the sample and then recombined with the reference beam, creating an image based on
interference.

Detector

i Objective lens

Wafer is driven up and
down along Z-axis

Center of focus

FIGURE 7.17 Principle of Confocal Microscopy

Light Scattering Defect Detection M In the beginning of semiconductor manufacturing, parti-
cles and surface defects were inspected by an operator using a light source and a microscope. This
method was unreliable, leaving much to the subjectivity of the operator. A technique for identify-
ing particles based on light scattering (also referred to as laser scattering or scatterometry) came
into widespread use in the mid-1980s. This darkfield-detection method identifies surface particles
and other defects by illuminating the surface with laser light and then using optical imaging to de-
tect any light scattered by particles (see Figure 7.18 on page 164). The strength of the scattered light
signal received from an individual particle depends on factors such as size, shape, composition,
surrounding wafer surface (e.g., roughness and haze), and the type of equipment used. Particle
diameters down to about 0.1 wm are currently capable of being detected with light-scattering
techniques.!7

Initially, when light-scattering particle detection became widespread in the mid-1980s, it
could only detect particles on polished wafer surfaces. As the technology has advanced, it is now
possible to detect particles on patterned product wafers and wafers with a thin film surface. As de-
vice geometries decrease, the critical particle size that creates killer defects also decreases. It was
thought that the need to detect smaller particles would cause light-scattering technology to disap-
pear, mainly because the particle size detection limit of. about 1-12m was on the order of the light
wavelength. When the light wavelength is the same as the particle size, it is difficult to detect
particles because the scattered light intensity is not clearly defined.!® Improvements in light scat-
tering have been attained as sensitivity factors such as the choice of wavelength of the incident light
beam are reduced. In this manner, light-scattering surface measurement has become a dominant


===== page_164 =====
Photo detector | 4

. Detection of J

Reflected light scattered light 4
Incident light ;

&, Beam scanning

+— Wafer motion

FIGURE 7.18 Particle Detection by Light Scattering

technology for tool monitoring of surface defects with both unpatterned and patterned wafers,
primarily because its high-speed measurement provides rapid results during manufacturing
process runs.!9

Particles Per Wafer Per Pass. A practical aspect of measurement tools that detect wafer
surface defects is the ability to create particle maps to count the particles on the wafer, showing
where they occur as well as the distribution of particle diameters. A major effort in the fab is to per-
form particles per wafer per pass (PWP) measurements with unpatterned wafers to check the de-
fect counts from process runs (see Figure 7,19). Examples of processes analyzed for PWP are pho-
toresist spin tracks, dielectric deposition chambers, and chemical mechanical planarization (CMP)
equipment. To perform a PWP procedure, a technician uses a wafer inspection tool to count the
number of defects on a test wafer, runs the test wafer through the production equipment, and then
recounts the number of defects. Corrective action is taken to reduce the number of defects and
thereby increase the number of functional die on a wafer. It is often difficult to identify the smaller
particles. In this case, the light-scattering detection equipment may work in conjunction with the
scanning electron microscope (SEM) to identify particle composition for corrective action.

FIGURE 7.19 Particle Map

Patterned Surface Defects

Patterned wafers for fabrication metrology are regular production wafers used for in-line monitor-
ing of surface defects. Production wafers common in IC fabrication may consist of multilayer met-
als with up to six or more layers that have been grown or deposited in furnaces and cluster tools.
These multilayers make it challenging to distinguish between surface defects and the circuit pattern
on the wafer. The majority of defects on patterned wafers are detected using light-scattering tech-
niques. Optical microscopy (see previous section} is commonly used to detect surface defects on
patterned wafers. There is also a less-common method of digital comparison, which correlates the
wafer surface to a defect-free reference wafer.


===== page_165 =====
Me tltese tbon 5
Light Scattering on Patterned Wafers MJ Patterned wafers are becoming common for tool mon-
itoring during process runs. The major defects on product wafers are particles, scratches, and pat-
tern defects. With reduced geometries and increased process complexity, pattern defects occur more
frequently. This condition makes defect detection on patterned wafers all the more critical.

Defect detection on patterned wafers with light scattering is similar to unpatterned wafers.
However, the light-scattering process must be modified so that the measurement equipment can dis-
tinguish between scattered light from a particle and scattered light from a pattern edge. One tech-
nique is to use the regularity of the repeated circuit patterns to identify this particular scattered light
and block it using a filter. Other patterned-wafer measurement equipment has a function that elec-
trically cancels the cyclical signal pulses from the edge of the repeated patterns.

Critical Dimension (CD)

An important reason for critical dimension (CD) measurements is to achieve precise control over
all line widths of the product being built. In CMOS technology, the transistor’s gate structure is very
critical. The gate width determines the channel length and the length of the channel affects speed.
CD variation often indicates some instability in a critical part of the semiconductor manufacturing
process. It is projected that the critical dimension (CD) for the 16-Gbit DRAM will be 0.1 ym in
the year 2006.”° To achieve this CD control, the metrology tool will need a precision and accuracy
of better than 2 nm—the size of four silicon atoms side by side.2! The measurement tool that is ca-
pable of attaining this level of metrology measurement is the scanning electron microscope (SEM).

Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Mi The scanning electron microscope (SEM) has been the
dominant measurement tool to verify acceptable CD control in all submicron generations since the
early 1990s. The first commercial SEMs were produced in the 1960s. The SEM can achieve mag-~
nifications up to 100,000 to 300,000X, which is significantly higher than optical microscopes. The
resolution (smallest feature detectable) for SEMs is on the order of 40 to 50 A. Cross sections of
wafers viewed with the SEM can provide defect information. Because of the concern for control-
ling submicron linewidths, SEM technology was developed specifically for CD measurement in the
1980s, and is sometimes referred to as CD-SEM. The SEM measurement tool is often coupled with
other analytical techniques like EDX or FIB (see the following section).

SEM Basics. The SEM is a sophisticated microscope that functions by creating a highly
focused beam of electrons that scans an object while detectors measure the resulting scattered elec-
trons.?2 It is a nondestructive and noncontact metrology tool. The SEM has an electron gun, focus-
ing elements for shaping the electrons into a beam, and a final electrostatic-magnetic focusing sys-
tem that makes the electrons strike the sample within a small, 2 to 6 nm spot (see Figure 7.20 on
page 166). Since electrons have a very short wavelength (for instance, 1.22 A for 100 eV electrons,
versus about 5,500 A for visible light), atomic-scale objects can be viewed with SEM electron
imaging.

The electron gun produces a beam of electrons in a vacuum chamber of about 10° torr. It is
desirable to have a high current of stable electrons with a narrow energy spread. Near the wafer, the
electrons are focused into a narrow beam with a cylindrical magnetic objective lens often combined
with electrostatic focusing elements to create a high-energy beam. The beam undergoes x-y deflec-
tion with an electrostatic deflector to scan the wafer. When the incident beam strikes the wafer, sec-
ondary and backscattered electrons, along with other electrons, X-rays, and photons, are emitted or
transmitted due to interaction between the beam and the sample surface. The Everhart-Thornly
(E-T) detector is used to collect the secondary electrons and create an electronic image that
represents the sample surface. Backscattered electrons are also collected and offer superior
compositional contrast between different materials.

The energy of the electron beam is directly related to the image needed. A low-energy beam (<2
keV) has a low accelerating voltage needed for nondestructive, in-line CD measurement. A high-
energy electron beam (100 — 200 keV) is used to image underlying or deep structures such as contact
holes. High-energy beams make it possible to nondestructively image below the surface of the wafer
(say ~ 20 jum for a high-energy beam). Nevertheless, the problems with SEMs are most severe when
imaging dense or deep structures, such as very fine resist lines or deep and narrow contact holes on
insulator layers. This problem is mainly due to the difficulty of getting a satisfactory signal of


===== page_166 =====
qt Filament (electron emitter)

Electron extractor
Electron beam

Anode

Condenser lens

P<
X-scan signal SAL °

Specimen Detector

FIGURE 7.20 Simple Schematic of CD-SEM

secondary electrons from such structures. The limitations of the SEM are that it requires a high vac-
uum and it is necessary to coat insulating samples with conductive films prior to imaging.

CD-SEM. The CD-SEM has high resolution imaging with automated equipment control
that rapidly evacuates the chamber to the desired vacuum, automatically positions the wafer, and
uses a preprogrammed process recipe to select certain measurement sites. It is ideal for the CD-
SEM to have a high wafer throughput to support production (up to 70 wafers/hour at five measured
sites per wafer). The instrument can examine and measure wafers from all orientations and tilt an-
gles of up to 60° (critical for measuring fine process patterns, sidewalls, and holes), A CD-SEM also
can be used to perform defect review and analysis. Additional benefits of SEM imaging include the
integration of other metrology tools, such as X-ray compositional analysis, and focused ion beam
milling (see the following section).

CD-SEM
(Photo courtesy of KLA-Tencor)


===== page_167 =====
Step Coverage

Because of surface topography during the fabrication of wafers, the ability to achieve conformal
step coverage is a desirable material property (see Figure 7.21). Conformal step coverage has uni-
form material thickness in all regions of the step, including the sidewalls and corners.

Conformal step coverage

ey Oe eee

Nonconformal step coverage

, _(voids) ws ~—

FIGURE 7.21 Step Coverage

A high resolution, nondestructive surface profiler with a stylus tip is often used to measure
step coverage and other features on the wafer surface. This automated surface metrology tool uses
a stylus that comes in contact with the wafer surface with a force as low as 0.05 mg, capable of
profiling soft production-wafer films without damage to the wafer surface (see Figure 7.22). The
stylus usually has a diamond tip with a radius of 0.1 xm, with older stylus having radii up to 12.5
jm.?3 Current profilers can measure wafer features as small as 0.1 ym with a 7.5 A step height
repeatability.”

+5V
Proximity sensor = 9 CRT
aa
V f Al
Styl
tylus =
oS
Wafer surface y Stylus motion 424V
j-_L_t
Linear wAl + Control
drive ~ electronics

} unit 1
<t-— Direction of scan

FIGURE 7.22 Surface Profiler

Overlay Registration

Overlay registration is used following the photolithography process to measure the ability of the
tools and processes to accurately print photoresist patterns over a previously-etched pattern on a
wafer. Due to shrinking feature sizes, the registration of the mask pattern to the wafer is a challenge
because of reduced tolerances available for overlay registration. Furthermore, the increased use of
chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) creates very low-contrast images on the wafer that are
difficult to distinguish. This condition makes alignment of the wafer to the mask more complicated.

167


===== page_168 =====
Ideal overlay registration Misregistration
X, = Xz, Y, = Y2 X, > X, Yy> Yo

FIGURE 7.23 Overlay Registration Inspection Patterns

An automated-overlay metrology tool is used in photolithography to compare the registration
of the special overlay mask pattern transferred to the photoresist with the etched overlay features
on the wafer. It is important for this tool to be capable of measuring alignment targets on process
layers that have low-contrast and grainy patterns in the wafer. Using brightfield reflected light is
not sufficient to focus and measure images of low-contrast alignment targets on the wafer surface.

The primary method used today to measure registration of overlay targets is coherence probe
microscopy (CPM). It is also referred to as a correlation microscope. Coherent light has waves with
a definite phase relationship to one another, meaning that the individual light waves do not move
relative to one another. Using coherent light permits CPM to image not only the amount of light
scattered off a surface but also its phase relationship. This method is able to capture wafer surface
information in the Z axis along with the wafer surface plane, which improves focusing of the wafer
target and enhances the low-contrast image of a polished overlay target. Out-of-focus and diffracted
signals are ignored.25

Capacitance- Voltage (C-V) Test

MOS device reliability is highly dependent on the thin layer of high-quality oxide in the gate struc-
ture. Contamination in the gate oxide region can lead to a shift in the threshold voltage requirement,
causing device failure. Mobile ionic contaminants (MICs) and other undesirable charge conditions
are detected at the SiO₂ layer after oxidation steps with a test known as capacitance-voltage test,
or C-V test. The C-V test is commonly done to detect ionic contamination after oxidation steps. In
addition, the C-V test provides information about gate oxide integrity (GOD, including the dielec-
tric thickness, the dielectric constant, k, the resistivity of the silicon between the electrodes (to char-
acterize majority carrier concentration), and the flatband voltage (a voltage level where there is no
potential difference across the oxide structure).

The appropriate model for understanding gate oxide performance is the parallel-plate capac-
itor, which was explained in Chapter 2. For a MOS device, there are two capacitors in series that
are functioning when the threshold voltage is applied. The first is the gate oxide, sandwiched be-
tween the doped polysilicon gate and the channel region below the gate structure. The second ca-
pacitor is formed in the silicon substrate material. This results from the attraction of charges into
the gate region to form the conducting channel (known as inversion) during application of the
threshold voltage. The oxide and silicon substrate are modeled as series capacitors during the C-V
test (see Figure 7.24).

Gate . FIGURE 7.24
Polysilicon (doped) MOS Model of Two

Dielectric 9 Conductors

Gate Source 6 Silicon dioxide Capacitors at Gate
Oxide ~~ Silicon (doped) Region

Substrate

Source-Drain p-type silicon substrate
Silicon

Ground _L.


===== page_169 =====
Since two capacitors in series have a combined lower capacitance than any individual capac-
itor, there is a drop in the capacitance of the gate structure when the threshold voltage is applied.
This expected drop in capacitance is used in the C-V test to verify that no undesirable charges (e.g.,
mobile ionic contaminants) exist. .

Steps for C-V Test Ml During a C-V contamination test, the two series capacitors in the gate re-
gion are modeled by using a special wafer. A variable voltage is applied between a metallized area
on an oxide layer and the lightly-doped silicon beneath the oxide (see Figure 7.25).

Set range from -5V to +5V Oxide

I Measures capacitance for each
in 1-volt increments

value of bias voltage.

Le Capacitance .
@ meter < 4

nG

FIGURE 7.25 C-V Test Setup and Plotting

The first step for a C-V test is to apply a variable-voltage bias to both the metal contact of the
oxide film under test and the lightly-doped silicon beneath the oxide. The bias is varied from posi-
tive to negative for a p-type silicon and negative to positive for n-type silicon. The objective of this
first step is to deplete the silicon directly beneath the metallized area of majority carriers. In this
manner, the silicon functions as a dielectric, which serves to reduce the total capacitance of the test
structure because the oxide and silicon substrate are capacitors in series. The capacitance versus
voltage during this test is plotted (see Figure 7.26).

Cc —
max, {C-V plot for n-type silicon |
E
3
Ey
oO
Cait
0 | LL | it i | 1 L je |
t Ul 7 r TT Ls T T T Ly
5 4 3 2 -1 +0 41 42 43 44° 45

Bias voltage

FIGURE 7.26 Capacitance versus Voltage for n-Type Silicon (First Step of C-V Test)

The second step is to apply a constant positive DC voltage to the metallized area (its magni~
tude depends on the oxide thickness) while heating the wafer to 300°C for five minutes followed
by a cooldown prior to removing the bias (see Figure 7.27 on page 170). The elevated temperature
serves to increase the mobility of the ionic contaminants. The positive voltage bias repels the pos-
itive ionic contaminants and drives them toward the oxide-silicon interface.


===== page_170 =====
Temperature range
approximately
200 - 300 °C

FIGURE 7.27 lonic Charge Collection in C-V Test

The third step is to repeat the first C-V plot. However, now if there are positive ionic con-
taminants collected at the Si/SiO₂ interface, then a more negative voltage is required to get an
equivalent charge in capacitance. This is a voltage shift, Vs, that is a measure of the amount of con-
tamination in the oxide (see Figure 7.28). The magnitude of the voltage shift is proportional to the
ionic contamination in the oxide, the oxide thickness, and the wafer doping. The actual amount of
ionic contamination can be calculated from this plot.

Coast C-V plot for n-type silicon | ees

Q

E

3

e

oO

Cnax |

9 4 44+ +++ ++
3 4 3 -2 -1 +40 +1 42 43 +4 +5

Bias voltage

FIGURE 7.28 Voltage Shift in n-Type Silicon

The final step is to verify that this shift is due to contamination and not oxide charging. A neg-
ative voltage is applied while heating the substrate to move the ionic contaminants away from the
Si/SiO₂ interface. Performing the C-V test again should produce the original plot, verifying that it
was actually the ionic contaminants that produced the voltage shift.

Benefits of C-V Test Ml The C-V analysis is used to monitor the wafer to ensure that the cleaning
process removes ionic contaminants. This analysis is done either on fabricated test wafers or produc-
tion wafers with a special test structure (test structures are described in Chapter 19). The analysis can-
not tell you where the contamination comes from, such as the wafer surface, cleaning step, equipment
maintenance, or furnace process, The C-V test is usually a part of any evaluation for process changes.
In this case, wafers are tested in two groups. One group undergoes normal processing prior to C-V
testing while the other group follows the new process and then is C-V tested. The results are com-
pared to verify that the proposed process is acceptable. There is a small amount of voltage shift that
is acceptable, depending on the oxide thickness and the sensitivity of the measurement equipment.


===== page_171 =====
Contact Angle :

Contact-angle meters are used to measure adhesion of liquids to the wafer surface and to calculate
surface energies or adhesion tension. This measurement characterizes wafer surface parameters
such as wettability, cleanliness, finish, and adhesion (see Figure 7.29). The contact (tangent) angle
formed between a liquid drop and its supporting surface is relative to the forces at the liquid/solid
or liquid/liquid interface and can be used as a wafer-test specification or as a quality characteristic.
Both direct-angle measurements and indirect dimensional measurements methods are employed to
obtain highly accurate and repeatable contact angle measurements.

Contact angle

Substrate

FIGURE 7.29 Contact Angle

ANALYTICAL EQUIPMENT

This section provides an overview of the major analytical equipment used to support wafer fabri-
cation. These analytical tools provide highly accurate wafer measurements and are typically located
.in an off-line lab to support production problems. Figure 7.30 shows when some of these instru-
ments were first used and how important each one is or is projected to become in either process de-
velopment or manufacturing. The analytical equipment reviewed includes:

@ Secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)

¢ Time of flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS)
@ Atomic force microscope (AFM)
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES)
@ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
¢ Transmission electron microscope (TEM)
 Energy- and wavelength-dispersive spectrometer (EDX and WDX)
¢@ Focused ion beam (FIB)
Year Importance to
1950s _| 1960s [1970s | 1980s | 1990s [2008 | 20108 | Manufacturing
AES : : Development Manufacturing Useful
AFM a a 3 Research, Development : Useful
‘ Sas ‘ 5 Research, Development, | | ..
FIB co : ee Manufacturing Critical
SEM - Research, Development, Manufacturing } Pe eee os Critical
SIMS Research, Development, Manufacturing ! Critical
TEM Research, Development, Manufacturing i Critical
y : aoe : Research,
TOF SIMS : Development Useful
XPS Useful

FIGURE 7.30 Relative Importance of Analytical Equipment

Secondary-Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS)

Secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is a method of eroding a wafer surface with ions acceler-
ated in a magnetic field to analyze the surface material composition. These ions strike the surface
of the wafer and dislodge, or sputter, other ions, some of which are known as secondary ions (see
Figure 7.31 on page 172). Secondary ions contain the wafer material and any impurities such as
dopants. They are collected and analyzed in a vacuym chamber with a mass spectrometer that can


===== page_172 =====
Ton beam

NAN Sputtered atoms

(a and molecules

FIGURE 7.31 lon Beam Sputtering of Surface Material

identify the type of dopant and its concentration in the silicon.26 SIMS is essentially a destructive
measurement technique and requires an ultrahigh vacuum environment (around 107!° to 107? torr).

Recall that ions are charged particles, able to be accelerated or deflected in a magnetic field.
When accelerated ions strike a wafer surface, this ion-beam sputtering process involves violent col-
lisions at the atomic level. This action could be compared to a sandblaster, which propels sand with
such energy that it removes surface pieces but leaves behind craters in the base material. However,
with an ion beam, there are also chemical reactions that take place during the collision, creating
many complex molecules in the sputtered material. The particular incident ion could be nearly any
element, but is typically chosen as Cs*, O,~, O,* or Ar* and is selected based on the collision
chemistry that will best produce secondary ions.

SIMS Tool Description HM A common method to produce ions used in SIMS is the duoplasma-
tron (see Figure 7.32). A gas, commonly O, or Ar, is converted into a plasma by a low-pressure arc
formed between a hot filament and an anode. An extraction electrode is used to draw charged atoms
from the plasma.

Cs* ions are produced by a different method. A pellet of cesium chromate is vaporized in a
heated reservoir. The vapor feeds into a hot (~1100°C) and porous tungsten plug in an ionization
chamber. The vapor diffuses through the pores of the plug and becomes ionized, followed by an ex-
tractor that collects the ions and forms them into an ion current.

After the ions are produced, they go through an analyzer magnet to select the ions of interest
(e.g., Cst or O~). These ions are then either focused into a small spot with a magnet, known as an
ion microprobe, or used to flood the surface of the sample. The latter is referred to as an ion mi-
croscope and is the most common technique today. With an ion microscope, the sputtered second-
ary ions are collected simultaneously from many points on the surface and then identified by ana-
lyzing their mass-to-charge ratio in the mass spectrometer. A common mass spectrometer, the
quadrupole, is based on an oscillating electric field that separates ions into defined oscillations
based on their mass, permitting certain ions to pass through an aperture and be identified.

The rate of material removal using SIMS can range from a high sputter rate, known as
dynamic SIMS and often used for ion implanter characterization, to a slow sputter rate of a single
monolayer of atoms every few hours. The latter is referred to as static SIMS, and is frequently used
to analyze contamination in thin oxide and nitride films. The SIMS measurement tool is sensitive
enough to measure ppba (parts per billion—atomic) impurities in a junction or contact that is only 1
to 10 wm across. It has become the primary measurement tool used to verify the performance of ion
implanters because it can characterize the dose and depth of the junction plus reveal any undesir-
able metal impurities at the junction.?7


===== page_173 =====
Gas inlet (e.g.: argon)

Filament terminal

Tungsten filament

Vacuum chamber \
Pa

~~ Electromagnet

lon source assembly < (— Anode electrode

(— Extraction electrode

Seen le
-

Ton beam (Ar*)

FIGURE 7.32 lon Production in a Duoplasmatron

Time of Flight SIMS (TOF-SIMS) @ A limiting factor for SIMS is that the mass spectrometer
only detects around 0.001% of all the ions emitted from the sample. Another approach, referred to
as time of flight SIMS (TOF-SIMS), can detect as many as 10 to 50% of the ions emitted by the sam-
ple. The TOF-SIMS identifies ions of different mass by measuring the time it takes for an ion to
travel the length of a fixed path, since the charged particle velocity is a function of mass (see Figure
7.33), This fact makes it possible to reduce the incident beam current by a factor of up to 105 rela-
tive to a SIMS with a quadrupole spectrometer. The rate of material removal is so low that only a
fraction of a single-surface monolayer is removed in an hour. For this reason TOF-SIMS is essen-
tially nondestructive and is ideal for very thin films on the wafer surface.”8

Hy
i \

{

Detector

Grid

FIGURE 7.33 TOF-SIMS Mass Spectrometer Principle
Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)

The atomic force microscope (AFM) is a surface profiler that scans a small, counterbalanced tip
probe over the wafer to create a 3-D surface map.”? It was first demonstrated in 1986 and uses op-
tical technology, direct tip contact, and a laser to sense the position of the tip relative to the surface
(see Figure 7.34 on page 174), Probe and surface separation is so small (on the order of 2 A) that
atomic forces affect the probe between the surface and the tip. The tip geometry is critical and must
be characterized to provide accurate measurements. AFM measurements are exceedingly slow,
which is a problem for in-line measurements in a production environment.

There are several variations of AFM technology.*° In the simplest system, a laser beam re-
flects off the top surface of the probe tip and is directed to a photodiode. When the surface topog-
raphy moves the probe, it changes the position of the laser in the photodiode, creating an electronic
map of the surface. A more advanced method has the probe oscillate very near the surface. Atomic
van der Waals forces interact with the vibrating tip, inducing phase shifts in the vibration that are
detected by an imaging system. The benefit of this approach is that it can measure vertical


===== page_174 =====
Piezoelectric
drive unit

Surface atoms

FIGURE 7.34 Schematic of Atomic Force Microscope

photoresist profiles. AFM is a recent measurement technology and is considered a promising alter-
native to SEMs.

Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES)

Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) measures the energy of auger electrons emitted by the surface
of a sample when struck by an incident electron beam. It is very sensitive to the surface, with a
depth of only 10 to 50 A. Auger (pronounced 6zha’) electrons were discovered in 1923 by Pierre
Auger in France, and make up a very small percent (< 0.1%) of the total electrons produced in a
sample (secondary electrons are the dominant species). The energy associated with Auger electrons
provides a distinct link back to the parent atom that is used for identification of the sample elements.

Because Auger electrons are easily absorbed by the sample, only those Auger electrons on the
outer monolayers of the surface escape and are detected in AES. This makes Auger technology es-
pecially suited for analyzing the surface of materials, usually to a depth of about 2 nm. Oxides of
metals, silicides, and wafer surfaces are readily sensed by Auger spectroscopy. Furthermore, the
Auger spectrometer uses a highly focused electron beam, with the smallest beam spots on the order
of 12 nm, which is beneficial in microcircuit analysis. AES requires an ultrahigh vacuum environ-
ment in order to reduce contaminant formation on the sample.

X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is primarily used to identify chemical species on a sample
surface, analyzing to a sample depth of about 2 nm (equivalent to AES). All elements are detectable
except hydrogen and helium (their detection requires a good spectrometer). In XPS, X-ray photons
are directed toward the wafer surface and interact with certain core-level electrons referred to as
XPS electrons (see Figure 7.35). If the X-ray energies exceed the XPS electrons’ binding energy,
then the electrons are emitted from the sample. Because the binding energy of an electron is influ-
enced by its chemical surroundings, XPS identifies both the element and its chemistry.3!

| X-ray source

Electron detection
anc analysis ~

FIGURE 7.35 Schematic of XPS Measurement


===== page_175 =====
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)

The principle of operation for the transmission electron microscope (TEM) is similar to an SEM,
with the major difference that the beam of electrons is transmitted through an ultrathin slice of the
sample (on the order of 10 to 100 nm thick). Based on factors such as the electron wavelength, ac-
celerating voltage and specimen thickness, an image is formed and magnified on a screen with a
resolution of about 2 A (see Figure 7.36).

Electron gun
Liquid Ng Anode
Dewar
Condenser lens

Objective
aperture

CCD video camera

Fluorescent screen

Energy-loss
spectrometer

Detector () }

FIGURE 7.36 Schematic of TEM

TEM is the only metrology tool capable of quantifying some very small features on a wafer.
For instance, silicon crystal point defects, such as single dislocations introduced into an active junc-
tion by ion implant (which leads to junction leakage), can be imaged on an atomic scale by TEM.
Table 7.3 outlines some process areas of wafer fabrication that benefit from TEM analysis.32 The
most difficult aspect of TEM is sample preparation, with a wide array of techniques used, such as
mechanical polishing, chemical etching, and ion-beam milling.

TABLE 7.3 Sample TEM Applications in Semiconductor Manufacturing

a TEM Measurement
Silicon Material Dislocation and stacking fault densities in Si shallow junctions
Patterning Precise sidewall profile in polysilicon and metal structures
Metallization Characterization of metal silicides and alloys
Implantation Surface and buried implant damage

Contamination Thin organic and oxide films at submicron contact interfaces


===== page_176 =====
Energy- and Wavelength-Dispersive Spectrometer (EDX and WDX)

A useful signal generated by the incident electron beam of an SEM is the characteristic X-ray pro-
duced by the energetic primary electrons emitted by the sample material. These X-rays carry infor-
mation related to the atom species present in the sample, permitting the identification of a variety
of thin films, particles, and defects created in semiconductor manufacturing. X-ray detectors are
found on nearly all electron microscopes today.

The energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDX) is the most widely used X-ray detection method
for identifying elements and is complementary to SEM. This is primarily because the EDX can
quickly detect X-rays of all energies simultaneously, which means it is a relatively fast measure-
ment. However, because it penetrates well beyond the sample surface, it should not be considered
a surface analysis. EDX operation is based on a large diode made from a high-quality doped Si crys-
tal and isolated from the SEM vacuum chamber by a thin (~25 ym) beryllium window (see Figure
7.37). An X-ray passing through the window produces a series of electron-hole pairs, which are
electronically detected and identified back to the energy level of the X-ray. EDX can acquire all
energy peaks and make a spectrum plot within a few minutes.??

Si
Si(Li) detector | S\k
: Pp

Amplifier

Electron~
hole pairs

Photo electron path “@ OG ve if

Thin beryllium,’ /

To amplifier window” ”

FIGURE 7.37 Energy-Dispersive Spectrometer (EDX)

The wavelength-dispersive spectrometer (WDX) operates based on a diffracting crystal and
photo counter. The crystal separates and disperses the incoming X-rays by wavelength, which are
then collected by a photo counter detector. The appropriate crystal is selected and placed in the path
of the X-rays. Critical parameters are X-ray wavelength, lattice spacing of the crystal, incident
angle, and order of reflection. WDX is a slow measurement but yields superior measurements with
high accuracy.

Focused Ion Beam (FIB)

Traditionally, and often still today, a wafer is analyzed by removing it from the cleanroom to a lab
where it is cross-sectioned and examined on an SEM. This process started changing when focused
ion beam (FIB) systems became prevalent in the early 1990s because of their convenient cross-
sectioning capabilities. The FIB is a destructive technique similar to an SEM in design and operation,


===== page_177 =====
except that the primary beam is made of Gat ions instead of.electrons. These ions are focused
through a set of lenses into a small spot. At the location where they impact the wafer, atoms are
ejected into the vacuum, creating a small void of precisely controlled shape and depth in the sam-
ple material. This precision gives the FIB the possibility of making cross sections in specific loca-
tions of a wafer. The FIB technique is, however, a time-consuming process.

Focused ion beam (FIB) milling is capable of carving a 10 to 100-nm thick cross section from
any area on a wafer inside the cleanroom (see Figure 7.38). It can cut through metal, polysilicon,
oxide, and nitride layers with little or no damage to adjacent structures. Typically a high-current
beam is made for the initial cut and is followed by a low-current beam with a tighter focus for final
sample polishing. FIB can make the thin samples necessary for TEM. For this reason, equipment
suppliers make custom FIB designs specifically for this application.

Sample
epoxied //:
to grid

Grid

FIGURE 7.38 Focused lon Beam (FIB) Milling
SUMMARY

IC metrology measures the performance of fabrication
processes, typically with monitor or production wafers.
Metrology tools are either stand-alone or integrated into
the process tool, and they often use advanced defect-
analysis software. Specified quality measures are used
at different process locations to verify acceptable per-
formance, Film thickness is most often measured with
the four-point probe sheet resistance (opaque films), el-
lipsometry (transparent films), and reflection spec-
troscopy. Lesser-used methods are X-ray and photoa-
coustic. Film stress on a wafer is determined by
measuring the wafer curvature. The refractive index of
a transparent substance is measured using ellipsometry.
The dopant concentration is measured using four-point
probe, infrared interference, and spreading resistance
probe. Surface defects are measured with unpatterned

Sample milled
by FIB beam

or patterned wafers, with the latter becoming more cost-
effective. The optical microscope is used, with ad-
vanced features to improve wafer-surface contrast.
Light scattering is often used to detect particles on the
wafer surface, with contour maps generated to highlight
the defects. The recent trend is for more surface defect
analysis to be done with patterned wafers. Critical di-
mensions are measured using the scanning electron mi-
croscope (SEM). Enhanced techniques are used to
measure overlay registration. The capacitance-voltage
test provides information on the quality of the gate
oxide structure, primarily to ensure the oxide is con-
tamination-free. The contact angle verifies acceptable
wafer surface quality, Sophisticated analytical tools are
used to characterize the wafer and verify acceptable
process performance.


===== page_205 =====
Hee

Bs

Shy BS Xe

a

Thin Film Metallization Work Ba
(Photo courtesy of Advanced Micro Devices)

CMOS MANUFACTURING STEPS >

The remainder of this chapter focuses on the manufacturing steps that a wafer follows in a typical
CMOS process. Although there are some operations in the process flow that can be performed in
batches of wafers at one time, this process flow describes the manufacturing of a single wafer. For
further simplification, this process describes the production of only a microscopic area of a single
CMOS inverter consisting of two transistors—nMOS and pMOS. Cross-sectional views of the
product will be provided for each major operation.

The CMOS manufacturing steps to be described are:
. Twin Well Process
. Shallow Trench Isolation Process
. Poly Gate Structural Process
. Lightly Doped Drain (LDD) Implant Processes
Sidewall Spacer Formation
Source/Drain (S/D) Implant Processes
. Contact Formation

CADAL WN EE

Local Interconnect Processes

\o

. Via-1 and Plug-1 Formation
Metal-1 Interconnect Formation

— =
ee ©

. Via-2 and Plug-1 Formation

. Metal-2 Interconnect Formation
. Metal-3 to Pad Etch and Alloy

. Parametric Testing

— ee
bh WwW Pw

1. Twin Well Process

The first step in some CMOS wafer fabrication processes is to define the active regions of the
MOSFETs. Many of today’s sub-quarter micron processes use a twin-well (also referred to as twin-
tub) approach to define the active regions of the nMOS and pMOS transistors. A twin-well consists
of a p-well and an n-well, with each well requiring at least three to five major processing steps to
fabricate. A retrograde implant technique is used to obtain optimum electrical characteristics for the
FETs. This technique starts with a high-energy, high-dose implant that penetrates approximately
1 ym into the epilayer. Subsequent well implants are done at the same active site with a progressive


===== page_206 =====
decrease in energy, junction depth, and dose of dopant material such as phosphorous or boron
(measured in atoms/cm2). The results help set the threshold operating voltage for the FETs as well
as prevent common CMOS problems, such as latchup and other reliability issues. Figure 9.8 and
Figure 9.9 illustrate, respectively, the major steps required in the formation of the n-well and p-well.

n-well Formation Mi The five major steps in n-well formation are described below in the follow-
ing process and illustrated in Figure 9.8.

Description of Five Major Steps in n-well Formation

" Process Step ~: : oe

oe Epitaxial Growth

“Description 96 6 0 Ss eee

The silicon wafer, having already a thin layer of epitaxial silicon (epilayer),
arrives in the diffusion bay. The epilayer has the exact crystal structure as
the substrate, except with improved purity and fewer crystal defects. The
epilayer has already been lightly doped with p-type dopant (boron).

2. Initial Oxide Growth

In diffusion the wafer is cleaned in a series of chemical baths to remove par-
ticles, organic and inorganic contamination, and native oxide growth (natural
silicon dioxide growth) from the wafers. After the wafer is rinsed and dried,
the wafer is placed in a high temperature (~1000 °C) furnace process cham-
ber. Oxygen is flowed into the process chamber to react with silicon to grow
approximately 150 A of oxide. This initial oxide serves several functions:

(1) it protects the top surface of the epi silicon from contamination, (2) it pre-
vents excessive damage to the silicon during implantation, and (3) as a
screen oxide, it helps control the depth of the dopants during implantation.

3. 1st Mask,
n-well Implant

In photolithography the wafer undergoes a series of process steps in the
coater/developer track tool. The “tracks,” as commonly referred to, prime the
top surface of the wafer, coat the wafer with photoresist (liquid photographic
film), spin the wafer, and bake the wafer. An internal automatic wafer-
handling system transfers the wafer between process stations within the tracks.
Another wafer handler removes resist-coated wafers, one at a time, and trans-
fers them to the alignment-and-exposure system (an extremely complex and
precise camera). The alignment-and-exposure system photographs the image
of a specific mask layer directly onto the resist-coated wafer. In this case, the
mask layer defines the areas of the product that are to be implanted in order
to form the n-wells for the pMOS transistors. The exposed wafer is then
transferred back to the tracks, where the image first appears when the wafer
is sprayed with the chemical developer. The developed wafer undergoes
another bake step and is inspected before being transferred to the ion implant
bay. The printed pattern is inspected for proper linewidths, called critical
dimensions (CD). In the event of a major defect, the photoresist can be
stripped off and the wafer can then be reworked. Photolithography is the
only area in the fab where a wafer can be easily reworked.

4. n-well Implant
(High energy)

The patterned wafer arrives in the ion implant bay. The photoresist pattern
covers specific areas of the wafer that are to be protected from ion implanta-
tion. Windows, or openings, in the photoresist allow high-energy positive
dopant ions to penetrate into the upper surface of the epilayer (~1 jxm
junction depth). In this case, phosphorus is the desired dopant. The ion
implanter is the main process tool in this bay. Its purpose is to ionize dopant
atoms, ‘accelerate them with high voltage (~~-200 KeV), select the most
appropriate dopant species to implant, focus the ions into a narrow beam,
and, finally, scan the wafer to provide uniform doping across all unprotected
areas of the wafer. At this point the dopant ions penetrate the crystal lattice of
the silicon causing damage to the covalent atomic structure. This damage
will be repaired later in a diffusion and annealing step.

Note: After each ion implant operation, an oxygen-plasma reactor tool strips
the photoresist off each implanted wafer. The wafer is then cleaned by a wet
chemical process to remove residual photoresist and polymers created by the
plasma process. This note applies to all subsequent implant operations but
will be listed only this one time.

5. Anneal

The implanted wafer is transferred to diffusion where the wafer is cleaned
before being inserted into an anneal furnace. Four things occur as a result of
this anneal process. (1) A new barrier oxide layer is grown over the bare sili-
con. (2) The higher temperatures cause the movement of dopants further into
the silicon (called diffusion). (3) The implant damage is repaired. (4) The
bonds between the dopant atoms and the silicon atoms are activated, making
the dopant atoms a part of the crystal lattice structure (electrical activation).


===== page_207 =====
osphorus implarit
teeedtedd
© ce |
Oxid @ rewell
~5 um
@ p* Epitaxial layer |
p* Silicon substrate (Dia = 200 mm, ~2 mm thick) 7

FIGURE 9.8 n-well Formation

p-well Formation Ml The three major steps in p-well formation are described in the following
process and illustrated in Figure 9.9.

Description of Three Major Steps in p-well Formation

| Process Step: pS Description bo a ph ee de pe eo es
1 “2nd Mask, The photolithography steps for the p-well implant mask ¢ are exactly t the same
p-well Implant as for the first mask. The only difference is the mask is the direct opposite
of the n-well implant mask. Compare Figure 9.8 and Figure 9.9 to see the
differences.
2. p-well Implant The retrograde p-well implant energy levels are considerably lower than the
(High energy) n-well. This condition is due to the difference in the masses of the elements

being implanted. Comparing the atomic mass unit (amu) of boron (~11) to
phosphorus (~~31), boron is about one-third the mass of phosphorus. Thus,
the energy needed to implant boron should only require about one-third of

that used to implant phosphorus to the same junction depth.

3. Anneal This anneal step is basically the same as the first annealing step.

Diffusion}

p~ Epitaxial layer

p* Silicon substrate 4

PAs

FIGURE 9.9 | P-well Formation

2. Shallow Trench Isolation Process

Shallow trench isolation (STD is an alternative method is for creating isolation regions between ac-
tive transistor areas on a substrate.! This method is especially useful in the manufacturing of quar-
ter-micron devices. The preferred isolation technique up until the late 1990s had been the LOCOS
(local oxidation of silicon) technique that was instituted in the early 1970s.* Despite its complex-
ity, STI is gaining in popularity with ULSI chip manufacturing. STI formation is explained as fol-
lows in three major steps: trench etch (see Figure 9.10 on page 208), oxide fill (see Figure 9.11 on
page 209), and oxide polish (see Figure 9.12 on page 209).


===== page_208 =====
STI Trench Etch Ml The four major steps in STI trench etch are described in the following
process and illustrated in Figure 9.10.

Description of Four Major Steps in STI Trench Etch

, Process Step ~
1. Barrier Oxide

‘The wafer arrives in the diffusion bay where the wafer is again

Description
cleaned to re-
move contamination and oxide. After rinsing and drying, the wafer is inserted

into a high-temperature oxidation furnace. Approximately 150 A of new oxide is
grown on the wafer. This layer will form a barrier to protect active regions from

chemical contamination during nitride strip.

2. Nitride Deposition

The wafer is inserted into a high-temperature (~750 °C) LPCVD (low-pressure
chemical vapor deposition) furnace. Inside the process chamber ammonia and
dichlorosilane gases react to form a thin layer of silicon nitride (nitride, Si₃N₄)
on the wafer. The nitride will serve two functions throughout the STI formation
process steps. (1) Nitride is a durable masking material, which protects active
regions during the STI oxide deposition process and (2) nitride serves as a
polish-stop material during the chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) step.

3. 3rd Mask, STI

The wafer arrives in photolithography from diffusion. This photolithography
process step is similar to the previous masking step, except a different mask is
used, This masking step is much more critical than the first mask due to the
smaller dimensions. Inspection of the wafer includes CD measurements as well
as checking for defect inspection (DI), and optical visual inspection (VI). These
measurements require checking the accuracy of the alignment-exposure system
relative to the written specifications.

4. STI Trench Etch

The photoresist pattern is designed to protect areas of the silicon that are not to
be etched, The windows in the photoresist allow ions and highly reactive radical
chemicals to etch nitride, oxide, and silicon in unprotected areas. The preferred
tool for etching these deep trenches is the dry plasma etcher. The etcher uses
high-powered radio frequency (RF) energy to ionize a fluorine- or chlorine-
based gas inside a vacuum process chamber. The RF energy dissociates mole-
cules and ionizes atoms to create a chamber filled with a variety of plasma com-
ponents. These plasma components provide the chemical and physical etching
that results in the removal of silicon in locations designated as isolation regions.
The slanted profile and the rounded bottom of the trenches improve the filling
process and the electrical characteristics of the isolation structure.

Note: Following completion of each etch operation, the wafer is stripped of
photoresist and wet cleaned in a series of chemical baths. Key inspection
procedures include measurements that verify proper step height (A), etch rate
(A /min), CD, and DL This note applies to all subsequent etch operations but
will be listed only this one time.

Selective etchin

peed ddd dd

opens isolation re

ERRRROR,

ions in the epi ry

beddddd

1 i

C

STI trench

p~ Epitaxial layer

SW
N

¢ p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 9.10 STI Trench Etch

Biteb oor.


===== page_209 =====
STI Oxide Fill Ml The basic steps in STI oxide fill are described in the following process and il-
lustrated in Figure 9.11.

Description of Basic Steps in STI Oxide Fill

Process Step’ — ‘Description:
1. Trench Liner The wafer is again cleaned in the diffusion bay to remove contamination and
Oxide oxide. After rinsing and drying, the wafer is inserted into a high-temperature

oxidation furnace. Approximately 150 A of oxide grows in the exposed walls
of the isolation trenches. The nitride mask prevents oxygen diffusion into the
active regions. The purpose of the liner oxide is to improve the interface
between the silicon and the trench CVD oxide.

2. Trench Fill with This deposition process is performed either in diffusion using an LPCVD
CVD Oxide furnace or in thin films using a variety of oxide CVD systems. Higher through-
put and deposition rates are obtained with the furnace.

Trench fill by chemical vapor deposition

| head prey \
phidayy HP PL Hit

Trench CVD oxide

Diffusion

Line? oxide

p- Epitaxial layer

Va p* Silicon substrate 4

FIGURE 9.11 STI Oxide Fill

STI Oxide Polish-Nitride Strip Ml Planarization of the wafer surface is accomplished by several
methods. In the past, filling the gap to planarize the wafer could be done using spin-on-glass (SOG),
consisting of 80% solvent and 20% silicon dioxide. Baking the SOG after the deposition evaporated
the solvent, leaving oxide inside the gaps. A complete surface etchback also could be performed to
reduce the overall thickness. However, no method has been as effective a planarization technique
as CMP, chemical mechanical planarization (also referred to as polish). The following table and
Figure 9.12 on page 210 describe and illustrate the process.

Description of Basic Steps | in STI Oxide Polish and Nitride Strip

. Process Step. Description.
1. Trench Oxide In the CMP area the wafer is turned upside down and held by vacuum to a wafer
Polish (CMP) carrier. The wafer rotates in the same direction as a polishing pad attached to a

rotating polishing table. A chemical slurry keeps the pad and wafer wet during
the polishing process and provides reactants to help abrade the oxide surface.
The nitride, being a harder material than the oxide, serves as the polish-stop
material to prevent over-polishing the isolation structures.

Note: The following statement applies to all polishing operations and will not be
repeated again. The polishing process creates excessive particles and chemical
contaminants that must be thoroughly removed before transferring the wafer to
other areas in the wafer fab. Special scrub stations clean the top and bottom of
the wafer and ensure it is rinsed and dried. Inspections for film thickness, parti-
cles, and defects are also conducted before wafer is transferred.

2. Nitride Strip The diffusion bay is traditionally equipped with hot phosphoric acid stations for
stripping the nitride from the wafer. In the diffusion bay the wafer is stripped,
cleaned, rinsed, and dried, then inspected to check the thickness of the isolation
oxide.


===== page_210 =====
Planarization by chemical-mechanical polishing

(a 7 nn © en ae | TTT NY \,
r STI oxide after polish 1
| Nitride strip

cal
\ n-well p-well
Liner oxide
p~ Epitaxial layer
¢ p* Silicon substrate {

FIGURE 9.12 STI Formation

3. Poly Gate Structural Process

Forming the structure of the transistor gate is a critical step in the process because it includes ther-
mally growing the thinnest gate oxide and patterning and etching the polysilicon gate, one of the
smallest physical structures in the entire IC process (see Figure 9.13). The width of the polysilicon
gate is often the most critical CD linewidth of the entire wafer.

Description of Basic Steps in Forming the Poly Gate Structure

«Process Step Description = ls an

1. Gate Oxide Growth The wafer is cleaned to remove contamination and oxide. There is only a matter
of a few hours before the wafer must be inserted in the oxidation furnace. Oxide
will form as long as the silicon is exposed to oxygen in the atmosphere. The
wafer is inserted in the oxidation furnace and a thin oxide of approximately 20
to 50 A is grown.

fs

2.  Polysilicon The wafer is immediately loaded into an LPCVD furnace where silane (SiH,) is
Deposition introduced into the process chamber. The silane dissociates and polysilicon is
deposited on the wafer. Approximately 5000 A of polysilicon (also referred to as
poly) is deposited. Some processes may call for doping the polysilicon immedi-
ately following the deposition step. This action can be done in the same process
chamber or in a separate furnace.

3. 4th Mask, Poly Gate In photolithography, deep UV lithography (assuming sub-0.25 um technology)
techniques are used to pattern the fine structures of the polysilicon gates. An an-
tireflective coating (ARC) is commonly applied between the poly and the pho-
toresist to reduce undesirable reflections. The resist linewidths for the gates are
the narrowest structures on the IC; therefore, various quality measurements are
required, such as CD and overlay registration (OL), and defect inspection (DI.

4. Poly Gate Etch By far one of the most critical etch steps in the IC process requires the use of the
best anisotropic plasma etchers available in the fab. These single-direction etch-
ers etch the polysilicon to provide the vertical profile as shown in Figure 9.13.

;
|
wrote nur we wena nese sna | | >@ Photoresist
a i. Polysilicon | |
! _Sepositog’®) FARO _____ Qo gate etch _
10o@ Oe =O _Oumnesge fe

Dittusiont >| ree + Etch at a ee p-well wy

p~ Epitaxial layer .
oo oe one p* Silicon substrate {

FIGURE 9.13 Poly Gate Structural Process

NT


===== page_211 =====
4. Lightly Doped Drain (LDD) Implants Process

As gate widths get smaller, the channel length below the gate structure (the silicon region between
the source and drain) also decreases. This reduction increases the potential for charges to
punchthrough the transistor source and drain and cause undesirable channel leakage current. There
are techniques that are used to reduce the occurrence of this leakage in the channel.

The next series of ion implant steps begins to define the source and drain regions of transis-
tors. Each pMOS and nMOS transistor will be implanted twice—once with a shallow implant called
the lightly doped drain (LDD) implant, then followed by a medium or high dose source/drain
implant. Lightly doped drain (LDD) implants (see Figure 9.14 below and Figure 9.15 on page 212)
use the larger mass of arsenic and BF, dopant materials to create an amorphous (disorganized with
no long-range order or crystal structure) upper layer of silicon. The combination of large mass and
amorphous surface conditions helps maintain a shallow junction, which also helps reduce channel
current leakage effects between the source and drain.

n”~ LDD Implant M™@ The steps for creating n~ lightly doped drain implants are described in the
following process and illustrated in Figure 9.14.

Description of n- Lightly Doped Drain Implant

: Process Step ~ . Description ©: ~ « * ,

1. Sth Mask, The purpose of this masking step is to pattern the wafer i in a manner x that opens
n”~ LDD Implant —_ windows in the photoresist where n-channel transistors can be implanted. All
other areas are protected by the remaining photoresist.

2. no” LDD Implant Arsenic ions are selectively implanted through the windows in the patterned

(Low energy, resist. The energy, dose and depth are significantly lower than in the previous
shallowjunction n-well implant steps. Arsenic is preferred over phosphorus because its larger
depth) mass amorphizes the silicon surface to create a more uniform dopant depth

during implant.

nic n- LDD im

MUTT TPP i
Fpraresimaadh HHA HHH

n-well

p~ Epitaxial layer

\e

p* Silicon substrate 4

FIGURE 9.14 n-~ LDD Implant


===== page_212 =====
p~ LDD Implant M™ The steps for creating p~ lightly doped drain implants are described in the
following process and illustrated in Figure 9.15.

Peseription of p- Lightly Doped Drain Implant

* Process Step ~~ Description

1. 6th Mask, The purpose of this masking step is to pattern the wafer in a manner that opens |
p” LDD Implant —_ windows in the photoresist where p-channel transistors can be implanted, All
other areas are protected by the remaining photoresist.

2. p LDDImplant Boron difluoride, BF.,, is preferred over boron for this implant step. BF, is a

(Low energy, heavier substance than boron. The heavier BF, helps amorphize the silicon
shallow junction surface.
depth)

p~ Epitaxial layer

4 p* Silicon substrate 4
FIGURE 9.15 p~ LDD Implant

5. Sidewall Spacer Formation

Sidewall spacers will be used alongside the poly gates to prevent the higher source/drain (S/D) im-
plant from penetrating too close to the channel where S/D punchthrough could occur. Sidewall
spacer formation requires two major process steps (see Figure 9.16). First, an oxide layer is de-
posited across the surface of the wafer, then the oxide is etched back using a dry etch process. There
is no requirement for a masking step because the anisotropic (single-direction) etch tool uses ions
to sputter away most of the oxide. The etch process ends when the polysilicon is exposed. However,
not all of the oxide is removed. Some oxide remains on the sidewalls of the polysilicon gates.

Description of Two Major Steps in Sidewall a Spacer Formation

- Pro 25s Step . Description oe. fos Bw ad a
Spacer Oxide This procedure is performed i in the thin film bay. Approximately 1 1000 Ae of
Deposition oxide is deposited with a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. This layer

will be used to form spacers on the sides of the polysilicon gates.
2. Spacer Oxide The dry plasma etcher removes most of the CVD oxide leaving behind the
Etchback thicker oxide on the sidewalls of the polysilicon gates.

©) Spacer etchback by anisotropic plasma etcher

of Hm Csimatnte gat Geeta
—fpitustor]—} Photo |} Etch
p- Epitaxial layer

Ltn ¢ p* Silicon substrate {

FIGURE 9.16 Sidewall Spacer Formation


===== page_213 =====
6. Source/Drain (S/D) Implant Processes

t

To complete the retrograde implant technique, medium-dose implants are made to penetrate the sil-
icon slightly beyond the LDD junction depth, but not as deep as the original twin-well implants (see
Figure 9.17 and Figure 9.18). The spacer oxide from the previous step will protect the channel from
the dopant atoms during the implant process.

nt S/D Implant M@ The steps for creating n* source/drain implants are described in the follow-
ing process and illustrated in Figure 9.17.

Description of n+ Source/Drain Implant

: Process Step -

1. 7th Mask,
nt S/D Implant

Description: -

This masking step defines areas of the nMOS transistors that are to be’
implanted.

2. nt? S/D Implant
(Medium energy)

This is a medium-energy implant step that penetrates the silicon deeper than the
LDD junction depth. Spacer oxide prevents the arsenic dopant from encroaching
into the narrow channel.

n+ S/D im

PE a eo

FIGURE 9.17 n+ S/D Implant

p~ Epitaxial layer

; _ pt Silicon substrate _ 4

pt S/D Implant M The steps for creating the p+ source/drain regions are similar to n* S/D for-
mation. The steps for p* S/D are described in the following process and illustrated in Figure 9.18.

Description of p+ Source/Drain Implant

: “Process § Step,

1. 8th Mask,
pt S/D Implant

‘Description nn a ped

This masking step defines areas of the . pMOS 1 transistors that ¢ are to be
implanted.

2. = S/D Implant
(Medium energy)

This implant step penetrates the silicon slightly beyond the LDD junction depth.
Spacer oxide prevents boron dopant from encroaching into the narrow channel.

3. Anneal

The implanted wafer is annealed in a rapid thermal process (RTP) tool. RTP
tools have the ability to quickly reach temperatures of ~1000 °C and maintain
the setpoint for several seconds. This condition is important to prevent structures
from spreading and to control the diffusion of dopants in the S/D regions.

(@) Boron p+ S/D implant

ra pitusion —|

MTTESETITIAAT ALARA ITI ETTT
LEFF LIHAT 1 @ photoresist mas) 1414

p- Epitaxial layer

AY
v

p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 9.18 pt S/D Implant

213


===== page_214 =====
7, Contact Formation

The purpose of the contact formation process steps is to form metal contacts on all active areas of
silicon. These metal contacts serve to promote adhesion between the silicon and the metal conduc-
tor material that will be deposited later (see Figure 9.19). Titanium is a good choice for the metal
contact material, although cobalt can also be used. Titanium has low resistivity characteristics and
reacts very well with silicon. When raised to a temperature >700 °C, titanium bonds with silicon to
form a titanium silicide (TiSi,) compound, or tisilicide. Titanium and silicon dioxide do not react;
therefore, no chemical bonding or physical connection is made between these two materials. Thus,
titanium can be easily etched off the oxide without the need for a masking step. Tisilicide remains
at all locations where active silicon exists (e.g. source, drain, and gate).

Description of Major Steps | in Titanium Contact Formation

pears

7 ‘Process Step _ . Deseription

1. Titanium The wafer is cleaned thoroughly to remove e contaminants and oxides from the
Deposition silicon. Titanium (Ti) is deposited on wafers using a sputtering process.
Sputtering is a physical vapor deposition (PVD) process that is performed in a
plasma process chamber where energetic argon ions bombard a metal target to
release metal atoms, which deposit onto a wafer.

2.  Amneal The wafer is inserted in the RTP tool. The high temperature triggers a chemical
reaction between titanium and silicon that forms TiSi, (tisilicide).

3. Titanium Etch Chemicals etch away the unreacted titanium, leaving behind tisilicide over the
active silicon areas.

G) Titanium min

DORR AEA EERO ROE,

te

P* n-well pt

p~ Epitaxial layer
4 p* Silicon substrate 4

wr

FIGURE 9.19 Contact Formation

8. Local Interconnect (LI Process

The next step in the IC manufacturing process is to form metal connecting lines between transistors
and other tisilicide contacts. The method used in this process flow is referred to as local intercon-
nect (LI). The steps leading up to the formation of LI are as complicated as the formation of the STI.
The process begins with the deposition of dielectric films, followed by CMP, patterning, etch, and
tungsten metal deposition and finished off with a metal polish (see Figure 9.20 and Figure 9.21).
This process is referred to as damascene—a name adopted from a practice that began thousands of
years ago by artisans in Damascus, Syria.> The result of these steps produces a top surface that re-
sembles intricate inlaid jewelry or artwork. The graphic in Figure 9.22 illustrates how the metal
lines are formed within the walls of the etched oxide.

LI metal

LI oxide

FIGURE 9.20 LI Oxide as a Dielectric for Inlaid LI Metal


===== page_215 =====
Description of LI Oxide Dielectric Formation

* Process Step ; Description i er wos
1. Nitride (SiN) A barrier layer of silicon nitride is deposited using a CVD process. The nitride
CVD provides protection for the active regions from the dopants in the next film layer.

2. Doped Oxide CVD The LI dielectric component of the local interconnect structure is formed from
CVD oxide (SiO). This oxide is lightly doped with phosphorus or boron. The
addition of dopants to the oxide improves the dielectric qualities of the glass. An
additional RTP step allows the glass to flow and smooth the surface.

3. Oxide Polish CMP is used to planarize the LI oxide. The resulting thickness of the oxide
(CMP) after polish is ~8000 A.

4, 9th Mask, LI Etch The wafer is patterned in photolithography and then etched in the etch bay.
Narrow trenches are created in the LI oxide that will serve as the forms for
defining the paths for the LI metal.

Doped oxide CVD

f \ /
PN LY NL LY NYT
SINsCVD _{3) Oxide polish _

LI oxide

n-well

p~ Epitaxial layer

Ns

¢ p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 9.21 LI Oxide Dielectric Formation

Description of LI Metal Formation

- . Process Step . . Description. --- “ ft yng gE ae
1. Titanium A thin barrier layer of titanium (Ti) lines the bottom and the inside of the LI
Deposition walls. The Ti serves as a “double-adhesive tape” to hold the tungsten (W)

(PVD process) to the SiO₂.

2. Titanium Nitride Titanium nitride (TiN) is deposited immediately over the Ti to serve as a

Deposition diffusion barrier for the tungsten metal.

3. Tungsten Tungsten fills the LI trenches and coats the entire wafer. Tungsten is preferred
Deposition (CVD over aluminum for LI metal due to its ability to fill holes without leaving
process polish) voids in the formed metal plug. Another reason is for its good polishing

characteristics.

4. Tungsten polish The tungsten is polished down to the upper :surface of the LI oxide.

oa THUTIN Tungsten .
: it} ith Li tungsten polish
| © depostion PX deposiion __ BEI ungsen pots

r
bitusion|—| Photo

| impant p- Epitaxial layer
——_ ¢ pt Silicon substrate 4

FIGURE 9.22 LI Metal Formation


===== page_437 =====
to form spacers for transistor implants). Etchback is used when it is desirable to reduce the overall
thickness of a specific layer of film (e.g., when planarizing a surface to reduce topographical fea-
tures). Photoresist is another example of a material stripped off the wafer. In summary, patterned
and unpatterned etch processes can be performed using either dry-etch or wet-etch techniques.

ETCH PARAMETERS

Etch has specific requirements it must meet in order to replicate the mask pattern on the wafer sur-
face material. Important parameters for etch are:

Etch rate

Etch profile

Etch bias

Selectivity

Sd

Uniformity

Residues

Polymer formation
Plasma-induced damage

--ef © © O—mUCOlhUO

Particle contamination and defects

Etch Rate ,

Etch rate is the speed at which material is removed from the wafer surface during etching (see
Figure 16.3). It is usually measured in A/minute. The depth of the etched opening is known as the
step height. It is desirable to have a high etch rate in order to keep wafer throughput high. This fea-
ture is even more important when using single-wafer processing in cluster tools. The etch rate is de-
termined by process and equipment variables such as the type of material being etched, reactor
configuration, gases used for the etch, and the process parameter settings. The etch rate is calcu-
lated by the following formula:

T
Etch Rate = “ (A/minute)

Where, AT = amount of material removed (A or ttm)
t = time elapsed during etch (typically minutes)

AT = change in thickness

_— 4

AT

t= elapsed time during etch

male a

Start of etch End of etch
FIGURE 16.3 Etch Rate

Etch 437


===== page_438 =====
Etch rate is generally proportional to the concentration of the etchant. Factors such as wafer surface
geometry can affect the wafer-to-wafer etch rates. Wafers with significant surface area for etching
will deplete the etchant concentration and etch slower, whereas wafers with small surface areas for
etching will etch faster. This condition is referred to as loading effects. The decrease in etch rate is
caused by the plasma etching reactions.consuming most of the available etchant species in the gas
phase. The change in etch rate due to loading effects is a primary reason why effective endpoint de-
tection is critical (see the following section).

Etch Profile

Etch profile refers to the shape of the sidewall of the etched feature. There are two basic etch side-
wall profiles: isotropic and anisotropic. An isotropic etch profile etches at the same rate in all di-
rections (laterally and vertically), leading to undercutting of the etched material under the mask (see
Figure 16.4). This action results in an undesirable loss of linewidth. Wet chemical etching is usu-
ally isotropic in nature, which is the primary reason why wet etching is not used for selective pat-
terned etching of submicron devices. Some dry plasma systems are also capable of providing an
isotropic etch profile. There are instances where isotropic etching may be desirable depending on
the specific needs of the material being etched and the requirements of subsequent processing steps.

Isotropic Etch— etches in all
directions at the same rate

FIGURE 16.4 Wet Chemical Isotropic Etch

The desirable etch sidewall profile for submicron feature sizes is an anisotropic profile, where
the rate of etching is in only one direction perpendicular to the wafer surface (see Figure 16.5). There
is very little lateral etching activity. This leaves vertical sidewalls, permitting a higher packing den-
sity of etched features on the chip. Anisotropic etch is critical for the patterning of submicron devices
with small linewidths and features. Advanced IC applications usually require 88 to 89° vertical side-
wall profiles. Anisotropic etch is achieved with most dry plasma etching. Table 16.1 shows the pro-
file for wet etch and the various profiles achievable with dry etch.

The amount of anisotropic etch can be moderate (slight sidewall angle) or highly anisotropic
(vertical sidewalls). Etch profile refers to the shape of the etched film wall. A vertical profile is the
result of a highly anisotropic etch.

With smaller geometries, the etch profiles have higher aspect ratios. It is difficult to get etchant
chemicals in and reaction by-products out of the high-aspect ratio openings. To overcome this, it is
desirable to have directionality to drive the plasma into the high-aspect ratio openings. If plasma ions
are directional (perpendicular to the wafer surface), then only the surface is bombarded, not the fea-
ture’s sidewalls. This action forces etchant chemicals into high-aspect ratio openings with little
undercutting. For advanced ICs with sub-0.25 um CDs, directionality is achieved with a high-density
plasma source capable of generating enough etchant species to achieve acceptable etch rates.


===== page_439 =====
Anisotropic Etch—etches in only oné direction

YY YyyY

yryy

_ > Substrate

FIGURE 16.5 Anisotropic Etch with Vertical Etch Profile

TABLE 16.1 Sidewall Profiles for Wet Etch Versus Dry

Bo

Etch

Dry Etch Isotropic (depending on
equipment and parameters)

Anisotropic (depending on
equipment and parameters)

Anisotropic—Taper

Silicon Trench

Etch Bias

Etch bias is a measure of the change in linewidth or space of a critical dimension (CD) after per-
forming an etch process (see Figure 16.6 on page 440). It is usually caused by undercutting (see
Figure 16.7 on page 440), but can also be the result of an etch profile. Undercutting occurs when

Etch 439


===== page_440 =====
the etch process removes excessive material below the mask, causing the top surface of the etched
film to be recessed from the resist edge. The formula to calculate etch bias is:
Etch bias = W, — W,

Where, W,, = the original linewidth in photoresist before etch.
W,, = the final linewidth of the etched material after resist removal.

FIGURE 16.6 Etch Bias

Undercut

Overetch

FIGURE 16.7 Etching Undercut and Slope

Selectivity

Selectivity represents how much faster one film etches than another film under the same etch con-
ditions. It is defined as the etch rate of the material being etched relative to the etch rate of another
material (see Figure 16.8). High selectivity means that etching only occurs on the desired layer. A
high selectivity etch process does not etch the underlying film (etching stops at the right depth) and
the protective photoresist is not etched. Shrinking geometries require thinner layers of resist. High
selectivity is necessary in most advanced processes to ensure critical dimension and profile control.
Specifically, the smaller the critical dimension then the higher the selectivity must be.

eed {Er

‘ Ef Ef t Nitride

%

Oxide

FIGURE 16.8 Etch Selectivity


===== page_441 =====
The selectivity, S,, for the film undergoing etch and thé mask layer (e.g., photoresist) can be
calculated from the following formula,

Where, E, = the etch rate of the film undergoing etch
E, = the etch rate of the masking layer (e.g., photoresist)

Based on this formula, selectivity is often expressed as a ratio. A process with poor selectiv-
ity may be 1:1 (meaning the film being etched is removed as quickly as the photoresist mask),
whereas a good selectivity could be 100:1. Interpret this as the etched film is removed 100 times
faster than the film not being etched (e.g., photoresist).

Dry etching frequently does not provide adequate etch selectivity to the layer underneath. In
this case, a plasma reactor should be equipped with an endpoint detection system that signals when
it is time to stop the etch process with minimal overetching. The endpoint detector notifies the etch
equipment controller when the underlying film is beginning to be exposed in order to stop the etch
process.

Uniformity

Etch uniformity is a measure of the capability of the process to etch evenly across the entire surface
area of the wafer, across the entire wafer lot, and from lot to lot. Uniformity is closely related to se-
lectivity, since nonuniformity results in additional overetch. Maintaining uniformity across the
wafer surface is key to ensuring consistent manufacturing performance. The challenge is that etch-
ing must be uniform in different types of wafer surface pattern density, such as densely populated
wafer areas, large open spaces, and within high-aspect ratio features. Some problems in uniformity
occur because etch rates and profiles depend on feature size and pattern density.! The etch rate is
slower in small openings, to the point that etching can actually stop in small geometries with high
aspect ratios. For instance, silicon trenches with a high-aspect ratio opening etch slower than
trenches with a small-aspect ratio opening (see Figure 16.9). This phenomenon is known as aspect
ratio dependent etching (ARDE), also referred to as microloading. The objective is to minimize
ARDE across the wafer surface in order to improve uniformity.

Randomly select 3 to 5 wafers in a lot Measure etch rate at 5 to 9 locations on
each wafer, then calculate etch uniformity for
each wafer and compare wafer-to-wafer.

FIGURE 16.9 Etch Uniformity

Residues

Etch residue is the unwanted material remaining on the wafer surface after etch. It often coats the
walls of the chamber and the bottom of the feature being etched. It can occur for reasons such as

Etch 441


===== page_442 =====
contaminants in the etched film, improperly chosen etch chemistry (e.g., etching too fast), contam-
inants in the chamber, and nonuniform dopant distribution in the film. There are different names for
the residues left after etch, including stringers, veils, crowns, and fences. Stringers are small
residues of the etched material that are not totally removed, are electrically active, and can form an
undesirable connecting short between features. Residues are a source of wafer contamination for IC
fabrication and can cause problems during resist stripping. An overetch is sometimes done at the
end of the etch process to remove residues. In some cases the etch residues can be removed by a
resist strip process or by wet chemical etching.

Polymer Formation

A polymer formation is sometimes intentionally deposited on the sidewalls of the etch feature to
form an etch-resistant film that prevents lateral etching (see Figure 16.10). This produces highly
anisotropic features because it blocks the etching of the sidewall, thus increasing the etch direc-
tionality. The result is better control of critical dimensions of patterned structures. The polymers
come from photoresist carbon converted into polymers during etching and combines with etching
gases (i.e., C₂F₄) and etch by-products to form this sidewall polymer.” The need for sidewall poly-
mers depends on the type of etching gas used.

Plasma ions
1 1

t
1
1
1
‘
1
1
t
1

L | Silicon
|

Polymer formation

FIGURE 16.10 Polymer Sidewall Passivation for Increased Anisotropy

These sidewall polymers are complex, containing etchant elements and reaction by-products
such as aluminum, titanium from barrier layers, oxides, and other inorganic materials. The polymer
chains have strong carbon-fluorine bonds that are difficult to oxidize and remove.? However, the
polymers must be removed after the etch process or device yield and reliability is affected. The
cleaning of the sidewall often requires special gas chemistry for a plasma stripping process or pos-
sibly a wet clean using strong solvents followed by DI-water rinsing (see the following section).

Unfortunately, an undesirable side effect of polymer deposition is that the internal parts of the
process chamber also become coated with polymer. Etch process chambers require periodic clean-
ing to remove the polymer and to replace parts that can not be cleaned.

Plasma-Induced Damage

Plasma consists of energized ions, electrons, and excited molecules, which can cause plasma-
induced damage to sensitive devices on the wafer surface. A major type of damage is nonuniform
plasma that creates trapped charges on the gate electrode of a transistor, causing a breakdown of the
thin gate oxide.* Plasma becomes nonuniform due to poor equipment design or from operating the
plasma reactor outside of the optimum process window. Another type of device damage is from
energetic ion bombardment to gate oxide that is directly exposed to the ions. This damage could
occur at the edge of a gate electrode during etching. Plasma damage is sometimes removed from
the wafer through anneals or chemical wet etching.


===== page_443 =====
Particle Contamination .

Wafer damage from plasma can also come from particle contamination generated by the plasma
near the wafer surface. Studies have shown that particles are trapped near the plasma/sheath inter-
face because of the electrical potential difference.> When the plasma is turned off, these particles
fall onto the wafer surface. Plasma based on fluorine gas chemistries produces fewer particles than
chlorine or bromine gas chemistries because fluorine generates etch by-products with a higher
vapor pressure. Control of particle contamination is done by an optimized tool design, proper tool
operation and shutdown, and use of the appropriate gas chemistry for the film being etched.

DRY ETCH

Dry etch is the primary etching method used to remove surface material in semiconductor manu-
facturing. The goal of dry etch is to reproduce the image of a mask on the wafer surface with a high
degree of integrity. The advantages to using dry etch over wet etch are listed in Table 16.2.

TABLE 16.2 Advantages of Dry Etch Over Wet Etch

: - Description, of ‘Advantages ‘
1. Etch profile is anisotropic with excellent control of sidewall profiles.
2. Good CD control.

3. Minimal resist lifting or adhesion problems.

4. Good etch uniformity within wafer, from wafer-to-wafer, and from lot-to-lot.

5. Lower chemical costs for usage and disposal.

There are disadvantages to using dry etch. The primary disadvantages are poor selectivity to
the underlying layer, risk for device damage from plasma, and expensive equipment.

In the dry etching process, a low-pressure plasma discharge is used to remove material in
small feature sizes of integrated circuits (the creation of a plasma was discussed in Chapter 8). The
plasma interacts with the wafer surface to cause etching action and the subsequent removal of the
surface material. The major actions that occur for plasma etching of a substrate material are shown

in Figure 16.11.
Y RF generator ©

ESSA SSS ©

—

BON
(2) Dissociation of ¢ ——* (3) Récombination of ‘ ‘, (8)By-product
. Teactants by ° © clectrons with atoms ~ removal
electric fields @ “reates plasma Crass
(4) Reactiy
boniib x sorption of
‘ ‘ cals: products
Oy <—y on surface ie ~ L
_ Anisotropic (?
7 etch Substrate Isotropic etch
\ RXR SSS Cathode CQO”

at

FIGURE 16.11 Plasma Etch Process of a Silicon Wafer

Etch 443


===== page_455 =====
Configuration:| 90 2... | - a yf Arrangement, |. Biasing |. .°
Confi gura ion: Mechanism | ° (Tort) Arrangement, ty. |. Biasing |. co iree | Profile
Inductively- Physical (low) Spiral coil Yes On RF or DC } Anisotropic
Coupled separated from cathode a
Plasma (ICP) plasma by
dielectric plate »
Dual Plasma Physical (low) Independent Yes On RF or DC | Anisotropic
Source plasma and wafer cathode
biasing
Magnetically Physical (low) Planar diode with Yes On RF or DC | Anisotropic
Enhanced RIE magnetic field cathode
(MERIE) confining plasma
Endpoint Detection

Dry etch differs from wet etch in that it usually does not have good etch selectivity to the underly-
ing layer. For this reason, a form of endpoint detection is required to monitor the etch process and
stop etching to minimize overetching of the underlying layer. Endpoint detection systems measure
different parameters, such as a change in the etch rate, the types of etch products removed from the
etch process, or a change in the active reactants in the gas discharge (see Figure 16.24). A method
used for endpoint detection is optical emission. spectroscopy. This measurement tool is integrated
into the etch chamber for real-time monitoring of the etch process.

Endpoint
detection
Normal etch a Change in etch
rate-detection

occurs here.

Endpoint signal
LS stops the etch.

TRFTTTT?rrirrrrrirrrrrrtr rr rrr rrr er rir

Etch Parameter
Libtittsy te rittitzil

Time

FIGURE 16.24 Endpoint Detection for Plasma Etching

Optical Emission Spectroscopy Mi An excited species emits light at a wavelength that corre-
sponds to a specific material (see Table 16.6 on page 456).!6 The light emitted by excited atoms and
molecules in a gas discharge can be analyzed with optical emission spectroscopy to identify the el-
ement. The emitted light is passed through a detector with a filter to let light of a specific wave-
length pass through that is used to identify the etched materials. The emission intensity is directly
related to the relative concentration of a species in a plasma. In this manner the endpoint detector
can determine when the etch process has removed the desired material and proceeded into the un-
derlying layer. Optical emission spectroscopy is the most common method for etch endpoint detec-
tion because it is easy to implement with high sensitivity.’

Optical emission can also be used to perform etch reactor diagnostics. If a system has leaks
to the atmosphere, the presence of nitrogen is identified. Water moisture can be detected, which
could be caused by inadequate vacuum pumpdown after chamber cleans. Absolute concentrations
of species can not be obtained by optical emission spectroscopy.


===== page_469 =====
ETCH INSPECTION

The final step in the etch process is an etch inspection to verify quality measures. This inspection
occurs on the patterned wafer after all etching and photoresist stripping is completed. It has tradi-
tionally been done with a manual microscope inspection that used incident white or ultraviolet light
to inspect for defects such as stains and large particulate contamination. Manual microscopes have
been largely replaced by automatic inspection systems, especially on critical layers with deep sub-

_Micron patterning. Advanced metrology instruments are able to automatically inspect patterned
wafers for patterned defects and distortions (see Chapter 7). One of the most important inspections
that occurs at final inspection is the automated measurement to verify critical dimensions (CD) on
a particular mask level. The quality of the etch process is also verified by inspecting for etch prob-
lems such as overetching, underetching and undercutting.

Etch inspection is similar to the inspection at develop inspect, except that there is no pho-

toresist and defects usually cannot be reworked. Almost any defect, if numerous enough, will cause
the wafer to be scrapped. An exception to this rule is surface particle contamination, which can be
cleaned. Representative quality measurements for etch final inspection are described in Table 16.10.

ETCH INSPECTION QUALITY MEASURES

Typical quality measures for etch inspection are provided in Table 16.10.

TABLE 16.10 Quality Measures for Etch Final Inspection

Oe ORES en es a ae an eras OLS eS
1. Critical dim A. Linewidth change: excessive * CD bias for linewidth change is
difference between photoresist measured by comparing pre-etch
linewidth and final feature linewidth in photoresist with
linewidth after etch. post-etch linewidth of the same
feature on the wafer. Measurements
can be done with an SEM.

Excessive CD bias requires
optimization of the etch process for
undercutting or slope.

¢ The photoresist profile has an effect
on CD bias. Vertical resist profile
produces best CD bias.

2. Metal corrosion. A. Corrosion or attack of metal ¢ Corrosion often results from residual

film after etch. HCI on the wafer that is exposed to
water vapor in the air:

¢ Corrosion may be visible as small
bubbles along the side of metal lines.
This defect is looked for by optical
microscope or SEM.

3. Sidewall contaminants | A. Residual sidewall passivants * Minimize formation by optimizing
after etching. that remain after etch, including | the pre-metal etch photoresist hard
remaining photoresist. bake.

* Residues are usually removed by
post-etch solvents or dilute buf-

fered HF.

B. Contaminants backsputtered ¢ Backsputtering can occur due to
onto the sidewall of the metal polymer used to passivate sidewall,
line or a via hole. leaving a “veil” residue (thin

overhang along metal line or via
sidewall).
4. Loading effects. A. Microscopic nonuniformity of | * Etch rate between narrow openings
etch process. is slower than open-field areas due
to reduced density of reactive radi-
cals in small space.

* Balance pressure and power of etch
process,"”

Etch 469


===== page_470 =====
5. Shorts after metal etch.

oe

A.

Types of Defects.
Bridging of metal lines after
etch leading to electrical short.

* Reduce pattern density effects from
microloading.

6. Excessive post-etch
residue.

A.

The following types of residue

may exist after etch:

¢ Stringers (small strings of
residue).

* Veils (thin residue overhang).

* Crowns
* Rails
* Corrosion after metal etch.

The causes of residue after etch are:

¢ Nonuniform etch process,

¢ Films deposited over topography.

* Nonuniform dopant distribution in
film.

* Contaminants in the film (in
addition to intentional alloys such
as Cu in Si).

¢ Contaminants in gas or chamber.
Check supply filters or clean system.

¢ Incorrect process parameter, such as
high etch rate.

*K, Mautz, Optimization of Single Wafer and Batch Metal Etch Manufacturing Processees vol, 96-12 (Pennington,
NJ: The Electrochemical Society, 1996), p. 283.
**S, Gonzales, J. Quijada, and G. Grivna, Submicron Metal Etch Integration Study vol. 2875 (Bellingham, WA:

SPIE, 1996), p. 302.

DRY ETCH TROUBLESHOOTING |

Problems associated with dry etch equipment and process are provided in Table 16.11.

oy “el a de NS HS

1. Incorrect etch rate.

. Change in RF power,

who a Be

ef A. .
B. Incorrect temperature. generator and matching unit.
C. Problem with pressure. * Check backside wafer cooling
D. Endpoint detection not system.
functioning properly. * Calibrate vacuum gauges (e.g.,
E. Improper wafer spacing capacitive manometer) and pressure
F Improper gas-flow d namics control system,
* MPFOPST B " y , ¢ Check endpoint detection system.
G. Improper maintenance.
; « Check wafer-to-electrode gap.

H. Incorrect process recipe. : tae

* Verify gas distribution system.

¢ Perform chamber wet clean.

* Verify process recipe and

parameters.
2. Inadequate selectivity. | A. Etch rate too high. * Verify etch rate.
B. Improper gas flow or pressure. |* Calibrate MFCs and vacuum gauges.
C. Endpoint detection problem. ¢ Check/calibrate endpoint detection.
D. Wrong wafer temperature. * Check wafer cooling system.
E. Incorrect process recipe. ¢ Confirm process recipe and
parameters.
3. Improper sidewall A. Contamination on sidewall. ¢ Check for polymer buildup in
profile angle. B. Temperature of wafer. chamber.

C. System pressure. ¢ Backside contamination of wafer
D. Incorrect process recipe causing nonuniform heating.

(misprocess).

* Check/calibrate MFCs and perform

leak test to check for contamination.


===== page_471 =====
foie Probl cot pearodierl. Probable Cause. a
4. Etch nonuniformity A. Depletion of etchant gas * Verify acceptable design for dense
across wafer. concentration due to ARDE. and nondense areas of wafer.
B. Improper gas flow. ¢ Check/calibrate gas distribution
C. Temperature of wafer. system.
D. Improperly positioned wafer in |* Check thermocouples and wafer
chamber. cooling.
E, Chamber configuration. ¢ Check robotics, wafer handling
F. Improper film thickness. system, and vacuum chuck
G. Improper maintenance. ¢ Check reactor plate spacing.
* Measure and verify film thickness.
« Perform chamber wet clean.
5. Plasma damage. A. Nonuniform plasma. * Poorly designed or maintained
B. Excessive ion bombardment of plasma equipment.
gate oxide. * Suboptimum process conditions.
C. Excessive RF power. * Check recipe and RF generator.
D. Improper maintenance.
6, Particle Contamination. | A. Leak/contamination from gas ¢ Leaks or faulty MFCs.
lines. ¢ Improper tool shutdown, operation,
B. Tool operation. or maintenance.
C. Improper gas chemistry. « Wrong process recipe.
¢ Perform wet clean,
7. Metal Corrosion. A. Moisture. « Excessive time delay for post-etch
B. Gas flow. residue cleanup.
C. Contaminants from etch * Check MFCs for correct process
process. gases.
D, Wrong maintenance procedure. |* Control time to resist strip.
* Check maintenance procedure.

SUMMARY

Etch selectively removes material from the wafer sur-
face by chemical or physical means. Dry etch uses a
plasma, whereas wet etch uses liquid chemicals. Etch is
generally divided into categories including dielectric,
silicon, and metal etch. There are nine important pa-
rameters: etch rate, etch profile, etch bias,
selectivity, uniformity, residues, polymer formation,
plasma-induced damage, and particle contamination.
Plasma etch has many advantages over wet etch and is
the most common etch process. Sidewall profiles are
generally divided into isotropic and anisotropic.
Anisotropic, or vertical sidewalls, are produced by dry
plasma etching. Oxide etch requires high selectivity to
the underlying material. Silicon etch is used for critical

applications such as polysilicon gate formation and
trench formation. A main application of metal etch is
aluminum interconnect wiring, with the need to etch
through complex metal stacks. Wet etch has been
largely replaced by dry etch for advanced IC fabrication
but is still used for oxide removal, wet cleans, and strip-
ping. The removal of photoresist at the completion of
etch or ion implant is known as photoresist ashing. An
asher uses a downstream process to minimize plasma-
induced damage and is usually followed by a wet etch
to remove residues. Etch inspection is the last operation
in the etch process and is necessary to ensure defects
are identified and corrected.


===== page_59 =====
The enhancement-mode transistor works very well in digital logic applications and requires
only a single polarity input signal (Vg) to operate the FET. On the other hand, the depletion-mode
transistor is partly turned on by the already existing closed channel. The input voltage can swing in
one direction to increase the current through the channel or reverse in the opposite direction to de-
crease the current through the channel. The depletion-mode transistor will turn off completely if the
input voltage to the gate is further increased in the opposite direction. Both types of transistors can
be designed into practical applications in both analog and digital circuit applications in either
discrete component applications or in integrated circuit applications.

MOSFET Mode Standby | Voc Switching Physical Structure
Type Condition | Requirements,
nMOS | Enhancement Off + Gate

nMOS Depletion On -

pMOS | Enhancement

g§

| _tetypé silicon’ shbstrate * :
pMOSs Depletion On + Gate

*. mstype-silicon substrate ~ -

FIGURE 3.26 Comparison of Enhancement- and Depletion-Mode MOSFETS

LATCHUP IN CMOS DEVICES

Just as undesirable parasitic resistances and capacitances exist in semiconductor devices, some-
times the pn junctions in CMOS devices can produce parasitic transistors that can create a latchup
condition in CMOS ICs that causes transistors to unintentionally turn on. Figure 3.27 illustrates the
parasitic transistors in a CMOS inverter structure. Complementary junction transistors are formed
as a result of normal manufacturing of MOSFETs in a CMOS structure. Given certain operating
conditions it is possible for the parasitic junction transistors to turn on and create a low resistance
path for current to flow across the CMOS structure.> The transistors become latched, thus prevent-
ing any further control of the MOSFETs in the CMOS device.

G

G

n-type substrate

FIGURE 3.27 Parasitic Junction Transistors within a CMOS Structure


===== page_60 =====
Indeed, the latchup phenomenon is a very complex concept. Any further discussion is beyond
the scope of this chapter. Suffice it to say that knowing about its existence will help you understand
the design and manufacturing steps that are taken to prevent this condition. Later chapters describe
several manufacturing techniques used in the prevention of latchup, namely creating isolation barri-
ers between transistors, placing an epitaxial layer explained in'Chapter 11 between the substrate and
the CMOS structures, and using ion implantation to create retrograde wells explained in Chapter 17.

INTEGRATED CIRCUIT PRODUCTS

Semiconductor products can be found in most electrical and electronic apparatuses throughout the
world. The most familiar applications of ICs-are found in the personal computer (PC). Such a com-
puter would employ a microprocessor unit (MPU), read-only memory (ROM), random-access
memory (RAM), communications interface chips, video graphics controller chips, disk drive con-
troller chips, and more. For the most part, these chips are built using CMOS technology, followed
by BiCMOS and bipolar technologies.

The types of ICs used vary depending on customer needs, environment, cost, power require-
ments, and other specifications. Most ICs, as was mentioned earlier, fall into two basic categories
—analog or digital. The following sections list the most common types of ICs found in most
consumer and industrial applications.

Linear IC Product Types

The linear IC family consists of devices that are designed to operate primarily in analog circuit ap-
plications. Linear ICs are typically used in audio systems, radio communications, industrial controls
and instrumentation, aerospace, and in automotive electronics. The following are a few examples
of linear ICs.

Operational Amplifier IE The op-amp is a high-gain and high-input impedance amplifier that
can be adapted to a variety of electronic control applications. It can be used as an amplifier, oscil-
lator, voltage regulator, voltage limiter, sample-and-hold amp, voltage rectifier, integrator, and
differentiator.

Voltage Regulator Mi The voltage regulator is a single-chip device containing diodes, transistors,
resistors (VR) and capacitors for the sole purpose of regulating the voltage delivered to a load. VRs
can be used in any electronic subassembly or system where a constant voltage source is needed to
maintain a continuous voltage over a specific range of load resistances. Some applications include
computers, peripherals, and various types of instrumentation.

Stepper Motor Driver Mi The stepper motor driver (SMD) is a bipolar IC used for controlling
stepper motors. An SMD can be used any place where a stepper motor must be accurately con-
trolled, such as in laser printers, photocopiers, scanners, and robotics, as well as aerospace, auto-
motive, and industrial applications.

Digital IC Product Types

The digital IC family includes devices that operate with binary (1s and 0s) bits of data signals, such
as those used in calculators, computers, digital pagers, cellular phones, and many others similar
applications.

Volatile Memory Mi Volatile memory is a semiconductor device that allows data to be stored and
changed as desired. Data in the volatile memory is lost when the power is turned off. Volatile type
memory devices are used in computers, calculators, and appliances as well as automotive, aero-
space, medical, military, and industrial equipment-—in any application where logic instructions
must be stored and changed as needed by the user. All memory devices contain millions of indi-
vidual memory cells. The probability of defects increases with device density; therefore, redundant

nsintcnt nbn note


===== page_78 =====
CRYSTAL DEFECTS IN SILICON

Semiconductors require a nearly perfect siligon crystal structure in order to function optimally for
advanced ICs, A crystal defect is any interruption in the repetitive nature of the unit cell crystal
structure. Another term used for a crystal defect is microdefect. It is essentially impossible to grow
or process silicon without making a defect. However, progress has been made on growing nearly
defect-free silicon with a very low defect density.

Defect density is a commonly used term in crystal growth and wafer fabrication. It is defined
as the number of defects per cm? of wafer surface that may occur during processing due to all kinds
of causes. Reducing defect density is a critical aspect for increasing wafer yield (see Figure 4.14).
Yield is the percentage of good chips produced out of the total chips on a wafer.

Yield = 66 good die = 75%
88 total die

FIGURE 4.14 Yield of a Wafer

It is important to study silicon crystal defects because they have a damaging effect on the
electrical properties of the semiconductor. These problems includes SiO₂ dielectric breakdown and
leakage current failures. As device geometries shrink and active gate areas increase due to more
transistors on a chip, the probability of a defect occurring in a sensitive area of the chip increases.
Such a defect can negatively affect the device yield for advanced ICs.

Crystal defects can occur during crystal growth and the subsequent processing of the silicon
ingot and wafers. Some crystal defects occur due to surface damage, including cracks and surface
defects from mechanical operations on the wafer. There are three general forms of crystal defects
in silicon:

1. Point defects: Localized crystal defect at the atomic level
2. Dislocations: Displaced unit cells

3. Gross defects: Defects in crystal structure

Point Defects

A point defect occurs at a particular location in the crystal lattice. Three types of point defects are
shown in Figure 4.15. The most basic type of point defect is a vacancy (also referred to as a void).

a0 9 0 0

000010000

©0005 00

00000‘ 00 ,

00000000

00000000

00000000

00000000

(a) Vacancy defect
9090000000 00000000
0 0.900000 00000000
©oM00000 , 00000000
foot cece 0 0 0° o.9 0 0
00000000 000000 0
00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000
(b) Interstitial defect (c) Frenkel defect

FIGURE 4.15 Point Defects
Redrawn from S. Ghandi, VLS/ Fabrication Principles: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide, 2nd ed. (New
York: Wiley, 1994}, p. 23.


===== page_79 =====
FIGURE 4.16 Dislocations

This defect occurs when an atom is removed from its lattice site and moves to the surface of the
crystal. Another type of point defect is an interstitial, which occurs when an atom becomes located
in one of the many voids within the crystal structure. When an atom leaves its lattice sité and takes
up position in a void, it creates a vacancy-interstitial pair, or Frenkel defect.

Point defects in semiconductor silicon have become increasingly important as device tech-
nology becomes more complex. Crystal growth conditions that affect the creation of point defects
during wafer growth are the growth rate (how fast the crystal is pulled) and the thermal gradient
(the temperature difference between the melt and the solid crystal) at the crystal-melt interface.?+
The silicon crystal cooling rate is controlled, which effectively reduces the defect generation. High-
temperature processing during semiconductor manufacturing is also a source of point defects.

Another type of point defect is due to chemical impurities that are introduced into the lattice.
Impurities are introduced intentionally or unintentionally during fabrication. They can take up lo-
cations at sites ordinarily occupied by atoms, known as substitutional impurities, or locate them-
selves in voids as interstitial impurities.

The most significant impurities not introduced intentionally into the silicon are oxygen and
carbon, It is important in VLSI and ULSI device fabrication to control these impurities. Oxygen en-
ters the silicon melt via dissolution of the crucible during the CZ process, as discussed earlier in this
chapter. Most of this oxygen is removed, but less than 5% remains in the growing crystal. Oxygen
present in silicon can create crystal defects such as dislocations (see the next section), The presence
of donor electrons from oxygen impurities in the silicon lattice can also affect the electrical param-
eters of a pn junction. Carbon can act as a nucleation site for crystalline defect formation in
silicon.

Dislocations

Unit cells form a repetitive structure in a monocrystal. If unit cells are displaced, this condition is
known as a dislocation (see Figure 4.16). An analogy would be a neat stack of bricks that has a
group of bricks displaced along a row. A form of dislocation is stacking faults which is due to layer
stacking errors. Dislocations can be introduced at any stage of the crystal growth or wafer fabrica-
tion process. However, dislocations occurring after crystal growth are often associated with me-
chanical stress to the wafer, such as that caused by uneven heating and cooling or excessive force
applied to the wafer.

In some instances, dislocation faults are induced following the thermal oxidation of the sili-
con wafer surface during device fabrication (see Chapter 10),”? The result is referred to as oxygen-
induced stacking faults (OISF). OISF defects appear as shallow, saucer-shaped depressions in the
lattice. These defects can be detected through X-ray analysis or surface etching. Specialized ther-
mal treatments (referred to as annealing) or gettering can be used to minimize stacking faults and «
dislocations in silicon crystal structures.

Crystal growth dislocations have been reduced for large-diameter wafers through use of a
neck-down procedure during ingot growth. This procedure consists of necking down the cross
section of the single seed at the beginning of the pull so that the dislocations grow out to the sur-
face, and then growing several centimeters at sufficiently high speed so that high-vacancy densities
remove the edge dislocations. However, as described above, dislocations can still occur from other


===== page_80 =====
(a) (b) .- ©

FIGURE 4.17 Crystal! Slip
Redrawn from S. Ghandi. VLS/ Fabrication Principles: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide, 2nd ed. (New
York: Wiley, 1994), p. 49.

sources during the wafer fabrication process, such as from wafer edge chipping or high temperature
processing.

Gross Defects

Gross defects are related to the structure of the crystal and typically occur during crystal growth. A
slip is a gross defect in a crystal that occurs when there is slippage of the crystal along one or more
crystal planes (see Figure 4.17).

Another gross defect is twin planes (or twinning), where the crystal grows in two different di-
rections from the same plane (see Figure 4.18). The source of twin planes could be thermal or me-
chanical shock during the growth process, The crystal on either side of the defect may be perfect.
Crystals with either slip or twin planes are unacceptable for semiconductor manufacturing.

88 88,88 SEE
PEPE E

FIGURE 4.18 Crystal Twin Planes
Redrawn from S. Ghandi. VLS/ Fabrication Principles: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide, 2nd ed. (New
York: Wiley, 1994), p. 55.

WAFER PREPARATION

Silicon is a hard, brittle material and of little use for semiconductor manufacturing in its form as an
ingot after crystal growth. The cylindrical, single-crystal ingot (also called a boule) must undergo a
series of process steps to transform it into wafers that meet stringent specifications for semicon-
ductor manufacturing. These wafer preparation steps include machining operations, chemical oper-
ations, surface polishing, and quality measures. The basic process flow for wafer preparation is
shown in Figure 4.19.

Wafer Lapping
_Crystal Growth and Edge Grind
Wafer Slicing Polishing | Packaging

FIGURE 4.19 Basic Process Steps for Wafer Preparation


===== page_84 =====
Upper polishing pad

FIGURE 4.26 Double-Sided Wafer Polish

Cleaning

Semiconductor wafers must be cleaned to achieve an ultraclean state of cleanliness prior to ship-
ment to wafer fabrication facilities. Cleaning specifications have undergone considerable develop-
ment in the last few years, to the extent that wafers should be free of particles and contamination.
The different types of wafer contamination, the appropriate cleaning steps, and the process proce-
dures for cleaning are discussed in Chapter 6.

Wafer Evaluation

Prior to packaging the wafer, it is inspected for quality criteria that are specified by the customer.
Standard quality measures are discussed later in this chapter. The most critical criteria relate to sur-
face defects such as particulate contamination and stains.

Packaging

Wafer suppliers must carefully package wafers for shipment to the wafer fabrication facilities.
Considerable effort can be lost if the wafers are damaged from transit or from the packaging mate-
rial. The wafers are stacked in a plastic cassette or “boat” that has grooved slots to hold the wafers.
A fluorocarbon resin material such as Teflon is often used as the cassette material to minimize par-
ticle generation. In addition, the Teflon is made conductive so that it does not generate an electro-
static discharge. All equipment and operators are grounded to drain off any charge buildup that
could attract particles.

Once filled with wafers, the cassette is then placed in a nitrogen-filled, sealed canister that
prevents oxidation and other contamination during transit. When the wafers are received at the
wafer fab, they are transferred to other standardized cassettes used for transport and handling dur-
ing wafer processing inside the fabrication facility. The shipping container is designed to minimize
the need for wafer handling. One shipping concept under development is a 25-wafer container re-
ferred to as a front-opening shipping box (FOSB) which would interface with automated material
handling systems in the wafer fab.>2

QUALITY MEASURES

Silicon wafer suppliers produce wafers to requirements that are becoming more stringent, which
represents improved control over wafer quality. A sampling of some wafer specifications and their
rate of improvement relative to the critical dimension on a wafer is shown in Table 4.5,


===== page_85 =====
For wafer quality measures, uniformity throughout the wafer is critical. Important silicon wafer
quality requirements are:

@ Physical dimensions

@ Flatness

@ Microroughness

@ Oxygen content

@ Crystal defects

@ Particles

® Bulk resistivity

The suppliers of silicon wafers must control their wafer quality by performing ingot and wafer
quality inspections to demonstrate that quality specifications are met. Defective wafers shipped un-
knowingly to a semiconductor manufacturing wafer fab facility would be catastrophic.

TABLE 4.5 Improving Silicon Wafer Requirements

Year
po, (Critical Dimension) :
Boca JP ns : Ss 1995 ‘ 1998 . 2000 2004—i.
wee wo : (0.35 ym) (0.25 pm) (0.18 pum) (0.13 pum) :
Wafer diameter (mm) 200 200 300 300
Site flatness* (i,m) 0.23 0.17 0.12 0.08
Site size (mm X mm) (22 X 22) (26 X 32) 26 X 32 26 X 36
Microroughness® of
front surface (RMS)° (nm) 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.1
Oxygen content <2442 = 2342 $23415 <22415
(ppm)?
Bulk microdefects™ (defects/cm2) <= 5000 = 1000 = 500 < 100
Particles per unit area (#/cm?) 0.17 0.13 0.075 0.055
Epilayer™ thickness
(+ % uniformity) (ym) 3.0 (+ 5%) 2.0 (+ 3%) 1.4 (+ 2%) 1.0 (+ 2%)
Adapted from K.-M. Kim, “Bigger and Better CZ Silicon Crystals,” Solid State Technology (November 1996), p. 71.
Notes:

A: Flatness is the linear thickness variation across the wafer or a site on a wafer (see the following).

B: See the following for a description of microroughness.

C: RMS is-a method for determining the best estimate of group of measurements—in this case, the surface finish
measurements (see the following). It is calculated by taking the root-mean-square (square root of the average of
all measurements squared). Surface finish measurements are obtained by measuring the highest point relative to
the lowest point on a surface.

D: ppm is part per million.

E: Bulk microdefects represent all defects within a square centimeter.

F: See the following section for a description of epilayer.

Physical Dimensions

Wafers must be physically dimensioned in order to meet the requirements for device fabrication and
to accommodate the automated wafer handling equipment used in the wafer fab. The wafer physi-
cal dimensions controlled and inspected during wafer preparation include measurements such as
diameter, thickness, location and size of orientation, flat (or notch), and wafer deformation. Figure
4.27 shows an example of wafer deformation. The most likely source of wafer deformation is the
slicing process.

Positive deviation Wafer Negative deviation FIGURE 4.27 Wafer Deformation
I 7 seed <7 Reference plane

[ _ Vacuum chuck


===== page_86 =====
Flatness .

Flatness is one of the most critical wafer parameters specified, primarily because the process of
photolithography (Chapters 13 to 15) is highly sensitive’ to local-site flatness. Wafer flainess is the
linear thickness variation across the wafer. It is measured by determining the distance that the front
surface of the wafer deviates from a specified reference plane. For a wafer, the reference plane is
theoretically defined by the back wafer surface if it were held perfectly flat, such as when pulled
down by a vacuum onto a clean, flat surface (see Figure 4.28). Note that the front surface of the
wafer is the wafer side where chips will be placed.

Flatness can be specified as site flatness for a specific site on the wafer or specified as global
flatness, which is the total wafer flatness across the fixed-quality area (FQA) of the-wafer surface.
The FQA does not include the exclusion zone on the periphery of the wafer surface. A larger area
for measuring flatness is more difficult to control than a smaller area. Typical flatness specifications
for site flatness are shown in Table 4.5 on page 85.

FIGURE 4.28 Flatness of Wafer Front Surface

Microroughness

Microroughness is the small-scale deviation of the actual surface from a nominal plane surface,
with many small, closely spaced peaks and valleys.?3 It is an indication of the surface texture on the
wafer. Surface microroughness measures the maximum and minimum height deviation on the wafer
surface and is specified in units of nanometers (10° meters). The roughness criteria is usually spec-
ified as a root-mean-square (RMS), which is the square root of the average of the square of all de-
viation measurements from a defined plane. This is a general statistical technique for determining
the most probable measurement. Measurement of wafer surface microroughness is done using one
of several types of optical surface profile instruments..

Surface microroughness is important to control for wafer fabrication because it is known to
have a negative effect leading to the breakdown of very thin dielectric films that are placed on the
wafer during device fabrication.*4 Wafers undergo a lapping step followed by an etching step to re-
move surface microroughness. Typical specification values for microroughness are shown in Table
4.5 on page 85. :

Oxygen Content

Control of the oxygen level and uniformity in the silicon ingot is important and becoming increas-
ingly difficult with larger crystal diameters. Small amounts of oxygen can have beneficial gettering
effects, which can tie up contaminants in the wafer, as noted previously in this chapter. However,
excessive oxygen in the silicon ingot can affect the mechanical and electrical properties of the sil-
icon. For instance, oxygen can lead to an increase in the leakage current at the pn junction and also
to increased MOS leakage.>°

Oxygen content in silicon is verified by using cross-sectioning, which permits composition
analysis of the silicon crystal structure. A representative piece of the silicon is potted in epoxy and
then ground and polished flat to expose the grain structure of the solid silicon. A chemical etchant
is used to darken and highlight certain elements for identification. Once the sample is prepared, spe-
cial microscopes such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) are used to characterize the crys-
tal structure. The use of TEM is discussed in Chapter 7. The oxygen content is currently controlled
in silicon wafers within a range of 24 to 33 ppm.*° Typical specifications are shown in Table 4.5 on
page 85.

scart dete wm Choe

Sa ene Lat,

won Db 5 SRE

Beebe dR andin tad ole

sin Annies te


===== page_87 =====
Crystal Defects

It is necessary to control the silicon in order to minimize the various crystal defects previously dis-
cussed in this chapter. As shown in Table 4.5 on page 85, the current requirement is for the number
of crystal defects per square centimeter to be less than 1000. Cross-sectioning is the technique used
to control bulk microdefects in the crystal.

Particles

The number of surface particles are controlled on a wafer to minimize yield loss during wafer fab-
rication. The primary means of reducing particles is to minimize the generation of particles during
wafer processing, followed by effective cleaning steps to remove particles. A typical wafer-
cleanliness specification is to have less than 0.13 particles per square centimeter (1300 particles per
square meter) of wafer surface area on a 200-mm wafer. This particle size measured is greater than
or equal to 0.08 micron.

Bulk Resistivity

The resistivity of the bulk silicon ingot depends on the density of the dopant material that was added
to the silicon melt prior to crystal growth. Recall that the most common dopant materials are either
boron to create p-type silicon or phosphorus to make n-type silicon. The result of adding these
Group IIIA or VA dopants to silicon is to decrease its resistivity due to increased carrier mobility.

It is important to achieve uniform resistivity throughout the bulk silicon. During the actual
crystal growth process, there is a radial temperature gradient that reaches a maximum at the center
of the ingot and decreases toward the outer edge. This radial temperature gradient produces varia-
tions in the radial doping concentration of the ingot.>”

The bulk silicon ingot is checked for correct resistivity and uniformity after the ends of the
ingot have been removed. The four-point probe measurement tool is used to measure wafer resis-
tivity. This measurement tool is described in Chapter 7.

EPITAXIAL LAYER

In some cases, it is desirable to have wafers with a very pure silicon surface of the same crystal
structure as the substrate wafer (monocrystalline), yet retain specific control over the doping type
or concentration. This condition is achieved by depositing an epitaxial layer on the surface of the
silicon (referred to as an epilayer). Epitaxial is a combination of two Greek words, epi, meaning
“upon”, and éaxis, meaning “ordered.”

In epitaxial silicon, the base wafer is used as a seed crystal to grow a thin layer of silicon on the
wafer. The crystal structure of the new epitaxial layer will duplicate that of the wafer. Since the sub-
strate wafer is monocrystal, the epitaxial layer is monocrystal. Furthermore, the dopant of the epitax-
ial layer can be n-type or p-type and is independent of the initial wafer’s dopant type. For example, it
is possible to grow a p-type epilayer on a p-type wafer with a lower concentration of electrically ac-
tive dopant in the epilayer than what is found on the wafer (see Figure 4.29).

eS RN

Ss

Silicon wafer ‘¢

Loe Monocrystalline layers

FIGURE 4.29 Formation of Epitaxial Silicon Layers


===== page_190 =====
weed Leda

Measurement
and control
electronics

Heater coil

Measuring tube

FIGURE 8.10 Thermal Mass Flow Controller
(Used with permission from international SEMATECH)

RESIDUAL GAS ANALYZER (RGA)

The residual gas analyzer (RGA) is an important process chamber instrument to identify the types
of gas molecules remaining in an evacuated system. In this manner, it can be used for leak detec-
tion, and analysis of contamination in process chambers, and as a troubleshooting tool to solve
vacuum-based problems in chambers.® Its most common applications are leak detection and
process troubleshooting.

RGA Basics

The principle of the RGA is to separate, identify, and measure the quantity of all gas molecules in
the chamber. An RGA measures the partial pressure contribution of each gas present in the vacuum
system, as well as the total pressure from all gas molecules. It typically operates only in the high
and ultrahigh vacuum ranges, but it is acceptable to use an RGA for vacuum conditions up to 10
millitorr.

DeviceNet

Mass Flow Controller
(Photo courtesy of MKS Instruments, inc.)


===== page_191 =====
There are four basic parts to an RGA: an ionizer, an apefture, an analyzer, and a detector (see
Figure 8.11). These are essentially the parts of a mass spectrometer, but an RGA is much smaller
and is designed for attaching to process tools. These four parts are located in the sensing head of
the RGA behind a process-specific valve inlet attached directly to the process chamber.

RGA Sensor Head

| Aperture | | Quadrupole Analyzer| | Detector]

i
'
t
{
i
‘
t
'
i
t
{
1
:
t
t
‘
}
'
i
i

Hot filament generates Electrons collide with High negative © DC and RF The detector recombines
high-energy electrons. atoms from inside the —_ voltage voltages on four _ electrons with +ions and
ptocess chamber to accelerates tion rods selectively measures the intensity of
create tions. movement. filter +ions by specific ion current.
their respective
mass-to-charge
value.

FIGURE 8.11 Basic Parts of Residual Gas Analyzer (RGA)

The ionizer creates ions from the gas molecules present in the system by bombarding the mol-
ecules in the chamber with electrons generated in the ionizer. The bombardment removes an elec-
tron from the gas molecules and creates positive ions. These ions are directed toward the analyzer
by applying a voltage potential or magnetic field in the aperture. The analyzer is where the ions are
separated by mass. There are several different types of analyzers; a common type is the quadrupole
mass analyzer (QMA). It consists of four cylindrical rods that have both a constant DC potential and
a high-frequency RF component (see Figure 8.12). For a given voltage level applied to the cylin-
ders, only ions of a given atomic mass-to-charge pass through the filter. All other ions are grounded
on the cylinder rods. The detector on modern RGAs will have better than 1 atomic mass unit (amu)
resolution to differentiate between the various ions. As voltages are progressively changed on the
filter, different ions are passed through the cylinders. In this manner, various gases of different
masses are separated and identified.

Selected tions
of specific

) mass/charge to
0 ) be sampled
)

FIGURE 8.12 Quadrupole Mass Filter

RGA as Real-Time Monitor

RGA data can be an important part of verifying that a process chamber is ready for processing, espe-
cially for large-diameter wafers (see Figure 8.13 on page 192). This is because RGA data can provide
real-time information about the cleanliness and stability of the process chamber during pumpdown.


===== page_192 =====
2 9

Roos 5 ghamben,

%

FIGURE 8.13 RGA Data Output

Using the RGA as an in situ (real-time) process monitor is a recent development. While the
wafer is undergoing processing, the RGA will directly monitor the chemical constituents in the
chamber to verify that the process is proceeding correctly.? The RGA can be used to replay condi-
tions in the event of a wafer quality problem. This replay ability allows for more rapid diagnosis of
process problems.

There is a growing need for RGAs to monitor chemical processes, such as plasma etching and
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD.!° For plasma applications, an RGA can fol-
low the different process chemicals as the reaction occurs in the chamber and give insight into
plasma behavior and how the chemical species change over time.

PLASMA

Plasma is a neutral, highly energized, ionized gas consisting of neutral atoms or molecules, posi-
tive ions, and free electrons. Positive ions and free electrons are formed when a valence electron is
removed from a neutral atom. For instance, fluorine is neutral when there are an equal number of
protons and electrons in its atomic structure. Fluorine is ionized when an electron is separated from
its host atom (see Figure 8.14). Ionization of gas atoms in a confined process chamber can occur by
subjecting the gas to strong DC or AC electromagnetic fields or by bombarding the gas atoms with
some sort of electron source. These methods will be covered later in greater detail.

A neutral particle is an atom with an equal

number of protons (+9) and electrons (-9). An ion is an atom with an unequal number

of protons (+) and electrons (-).

Valence ring can A positive ion is formed
when an atom loses an

wom. Clectron,

Inner-shell electron (-) Electron separated

from host atom.

”

os ov Protons (+) in the
b nucleus (neutrons not

Valence-shell o a
\ / | shown)

electron (-) \f
i

Fluorine atom has a total of 7 valence electrons. Fluorine atom with one less electron.

FIGURE 8.14 Creation of an lon


===== page_195 =====
The electrons, ions, and other species generated in a glow discharge will move toward the
electrodes. Electrons in the glow discharge can move faster toward the positive electrode when
compared to the slow moving massive positive ions. This movement produces a positive potential
in the glow discharge region. The positive ions move toward the cathode and cross through a dark
space, or ion sheath, adjacent to the cathode. The dark space results from the lack of electrons in
this region. With respect to the glow discharge region, the dark space has a large voltage drop and
strong electric field. This condition accelerates the positive ions toward the cathode, which then
ejects secondary electrons. These secondary electrons are repelled from the cathode and cross back
through the dark space where they maintain the glow discharge.

PROCESS CHAMBER CONTAMINATION

Wafer fabrication equipment with vacuum can be viewed as two general types: tools that process
large batches of wafers (e.g., 150 or 200 wafers) or single-wafer, multichamber tools with loadlocks
and several integrated process chambers. In general, chamber contamination on wafers is lower in
single-wafer reactors than in large batch tools. The improvement in single-wafer cluster tools is at-
tributed mostly to maintaining the processing chambers under relatively constant temperature and
pressure conditions, which minimizes factors that contribute to particle generation.

Trace amounts of water are probably the most significant source of contamination in process
chambers with vacuum.!! Water is a problem in vacuum systems since it is reduced to ions as well
as H, or O, gas molecules because of the reactor chemistry and vacuum. It sticks tenaciously to sur-
faces, outgasses slowly, and is a chemical poison in reactors. For example, the tenacity of water
sticking to chamber walls is so high that it is estimated that there are 10,000 times more water mol-
ecules on the chamber walls than in the vacuum space of one cubic meter of processing chamber.
It is also believed that water creates particle contamination during pumpdown by the formation of
particles.!2

‘In order to minimize water adsorption contamination in process chambers, it is desirable to
reduce the need to open or disassemble process reactors for cleaning purposes. This goal is often
accomplished by using in situ cleaning techniques (cleaning while the wafers are processed).
Nevertheless, process equipment still requires maintenance actions, which necessitate equipment
shutdown and repair. The specific steps followed by the maintenance technician during servicing
have a significant effect on the control of contamination in the equipment. Recommendations
for minimizing contamination during the servicing of wafer fabrication equipment are listed in
Table 8.4.3

TABLE 8.4 Recommendations to Minimize Contamination During Equipment Servicing

oe be. Recommendations.

}

1. Maintain good temperature and humidity control in the cleanroom environment where the equipment is
located.

2. Control the equipment’s pump and vent cycles to minimize turbulence and prevent particle generation
when processing wafers.

3. Avoid abrasive cleaning materials.
. Use exact replacement parts and materials to avoid subtle sources of equipment contamination.

5. Use low particle-generating gas-handling components, such as regulators and automatic valves that
have a tendency to generate particles.

-p


===== page_226 =====
modification produces three-dimensional shapes on the wafer surface referred to as topography or
surface topology.

Oxide growth is a natural phenomenon that occurs by exposing the silicon wafer to oxygen
at an elevated temperature. The ability to grow an oxide film on silicon is often listed as a signifi-
cant reason for the use of silicon as the most common semiconductor substrate material (another
major reason is silicon’s relatively high melting temperature). We use the term “grow” to indicate
that temperature is used to cause the oxide to grow out of the silicon semiconductor material, actu-
ally consuming silicon in the process.

yy
Wafer start
ae Thin Films Polish

Unpatterned

wafer

Completed wafer Photo Etch <¢-
Vv
Test/Sort Implant

FIGURE 10.1 Diffusion Area of Wafer Fabrication
(Used with permission from Advanced Micro Devices)

The amount of thermal exposure (i.e., temperature multiplied by time) for a wafer during pro-
cessing is referred to as the thermal budget. The thermal budget requirement for wafer fabrication
is rapidly dropping.” A goal throughout semiconductor processing is to minimize the amount of
thermal (heat) exposure to the wafer. As the critical dimension on device structures decreases to
0.18 um and beyond, scaling requirements dictate shallower junction depths. To minimize the un-
acceptable diffusion of dopants out of a shallow junction region, the thermal budget must decrease
accordingly. Another problem caused by excessive thermal budget is the increase in ohmic contact
resistance of metal-layer interconnects (see Chapter 12), which increases the overall resistance of
the conductive paths. A factor in determining the process conditions for many wafer fabrication
process steps is the ability to minimize the thermal budget, either by reduced temperature or by min-
imizing the time at temperature.

OXIDE FILM

An oxide layer is grown on silicon typically at thermal oxidation temperatures between 750°C to
1100°C. An oxide layer grown on silicon is referred to as thermal oxide or thermal silicon dioxide
(SiO₂). Since silicon dioxide is an oxide material, the two terms are used interchangeably. Another
term for silicon dioxide is glass. Silicon dioxide is a dielectric material and will not conduct
electricity.

Nature of Oxide Film

When a silicon surface is exposed to oxygen, an amorphous silicon dioxide film grows immedi-
ately. Although undoped silicon is a semiconductor material, SiO₂ is an insulator. The atomic struc-
ture of this SiO₂ film consists of a silicon atom surrounded by four oxygen atoms (see Figure 10.2).
We can refer to this atomic structure as a silicon dioxide tetrahedron cell. Amorphous SiO₂ has no
long-range periodic crystal order at the atomic level. Long-range order is absent because the tetra-
hedra are not arranged in a regular, three-dimensional array as in a crystal.?


===== page_227 =====
FIGURE 10.2) Atomic Structure of Silicon Dioxide
(Used with permission from International SEMATECH)

Silicon dioxide is a form of intrinsic (pure) glass with a melting temperature of 1732°C.4
Thermally grown SiO₂ has strong adhesion to silicon and exhibits excellent dielectric properties. A
layer of SiO₂ always covers the wafer surface because silicon oxidizes immediately upon exposure
to air with a few monolayers of native oxide (a monolayer is one layer of atoms on a surface). Over
time, the native oxide layer will thicken to an upper limit of about 40 A, even at 25°C room tem-
perature.° This type of oxide is nonuniform and usually considered a contaminant, with little use in
semiconductor fabrication. There are some applications for use of native oxide in wafer fabrication,
such as part of a dielectric film stack in memory cells. Native oxide grown from air is contaminated,
but native oxide grown in chemical baths using high-purity chemicals is very clean.

Uses of Oxide Film

Oxide is important for silicon semiconductor fabrication because of its ease of formation and its ex-
cellent interface with the underlying silicon material. It is the most common layer used in semi-
conductor fabrication. Different ways in which an oxide layer is used to fabricate a microchip are:

¢ Device scratch protection and contaminant isolation

¢ Field isolation to confine charged carriers (termed surface passivation)
¢ Dielectric material in the gate oxide or memory cell structures

¢ Impurity-mask barrier during doping |

¢ Dielectric layer between metal conductor layers

Device Protection and Isolation ME Silicon dioxide grown on the surface of the wafer serves as
an effective barrier to isolate and protect sensitive devices in the silicon. SiO₂ physically protects
devices because it is a very hard and nonporous (dense) material that effectively insulates active de-
vices in the silicon surface. The hard SiO₂ layer will protect the silicon from scratches and pro-
cessing damage that might occur during fabrication. Transistors have traditionally been electrically
isolated by thermally growing thick SiO₂ in the region between them using the LOCOS process
(discussed later in this chapter). However, this process is unacceptable for sub-0.25 um technology
and has been replaced by shallow trench isolation (STI). The STI process uses deposited oxide as
the main dielectric (see Chapters 9 and 11).

Surface Passivation MH A major benefit from thermally grown SiO₂ is the reduction in the
surface-state density of silicon that occurs by tying up dangling silicon bonds. This action is
referred to as surface passivation, which prevents the deterioration of the electronic properties and
reduces current-leakage paths of the semiconductor caused by moisture, ions or other external con-
taminants.° The hard SiO₂ layer will protect the silicon from scratches and processing damage that
might occur during backend final fabrication. SiO₂ growth on the silicon surface can serve to tie
up electrically active contaminants (mobile ionic contaminants) in the oxide layer away from the
active surface of the silicon. Passivation is also important for controlling the leakage current of

Oxidation 227


===== page_228 =====
junction devices and growing a stable gate oxide.’ For the oxide layer to function as a good passi-
vation layer, it has a quality requirement to be a uniform thickness and not have pinholes or voids
in the material.

Another factor in using the oxide layer to passify the wafer surface is the oxide thickness.
Adequate oxide thickness is necessary to prevent electrical charging in a metal layer caused by a
charge buildup in the silicon wafer surface, much like charge storage and breakdown characteris-
tics of ordinary capacitors. This charging would lead to electrical shorting and other undesirable

electrical effects. A thick layer of oxide that inhibits charge buildup from metal layers is the field

oxide layer, which typically is between 2,500 A to 15,000 A thick (see Figure 10.3).

Field oxide isolates active regions from each other.

Tin bind p-well Ww

p- Epitaxial layer
p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 10.3 Field Oxide Layer

Silicon dioxide also has a coefficient of thermal expansion very similar to that of silicon.
During high-temperature processing, the wafer will expand and then contract during cooling. The
SiO₂ will expand and contract at close to the same rate as silicon, thus minimizing wafer warpage
during the thermal excursions. This action also prevents film stress from separating the oxide film
from the silicon substrate.

Gate Oxide Dielectric ME An extremely thin layer of oxide is used as the dielectric material for
the important gate oxide structure common in MOS technology (see Figure 10.4). The gate oxide
is thermally grown because of its high quality and stability with the underlying semiconductor sil-
icon. SiO₂ has a high dielectric strength of 10’ volts/cm and high resistivity of approximately 10/7
ohms-cm.

Polysilicon gate

Gate Oxide

p~ Epitaxial layer
p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 10.4 Gate Oxide Dielectric

The thickness of the gate oxide is chosen specifically for the scaling requirements of the de-
vice technology. For 0.18-jm generation technology, a typical gate oxide thickness is 20 + 1.5 A.
The gate oxide has a specific thickness so that it scales properly with the entire gate structure to
permit induction of a charge in the silicon wafer under the oxide. The widespread use of MOS tech-
nology in the ULSI era has made the formation of the gate oxide a primary concern in process de-
velopment. A critical aspect of device reliability is gate oxide integrity. The gate structure ina MOS
device is the part that controls the flow of electrical current through the device. Because this oxide
is fundamental to the proper function of microchips based on field-effect technology, it is essential
that it have high quality, with excellent film-thickness uniformity and no contaminants. Any con-
tamination that degrades the proper functioning (integrity) of the gate oxide structure must be
scrupulously controlled.

Dopant Barrier Mi Silicon dioxide can be used as an effective barrier to selectively introduce
dopants into the silicon surface (see Figure 10.5), Once an oxide layer is grown on the silicon sur-
face, then mask openings are etched into the SiO₂ to create windows where dopant materials can
enter the wafer. The oxide protects the surface of silicon from impurity diffusion where there are

wate


===== page_229 =====
no openings and therefore allows selective impurity doping. Dopants have a slow rate of movement
through SiO₂ when compared to silicon, requiring only a thin oxide layer to block dopants (note
that this rate is temperature dependent),

rie HA
Lidl. Barrier oxide...

p- Epitaxial layer
p* Silicon substrate

FIGURE 10.5 Oxide Layer Dopant Barrier

A thin oxide layer (e.g., 150 A) is also grown in areas where ion implant occurs. This oxide
screen serves to reduce damage to the silicon wafer and obtain better control over the depth that the
dopant is implanted into the silicon by reducing channeling effects (see Chapter 17). Once implan-
tation is done, HF (hydrofluoric acid) can be used to selectively remove the oxide, resulting in a
planar silicon surface again.

Dielectric Between Metal Layers Ml Under normal conditions, silicon dioxide will not conduct
electricity. For this reason, SiO₂ is an effective insulator between metal layers on the microchip.
Silicon dioxide prevents shorting of'an upper metal layer to the underlying metal layer, just as the
insulator material on an electrical cord prevents an electrical short. The oxide quality is critical with
no holes or voids allowed. This oxide is often doped to produce more effective flow properties and
to better minimize the diffusion of contaminants (i.e., it acts as a getter). It is typically deposited
using chemical vapor deposition (not thermally grown) and will be covered in more detail in
Chapter 11.

A summary of different types of oxides and their uses in semiconductor fabrication is shown
in Table 10.1.9

TABLE 1 10.1 Oxide © Applications

- Py Structure 0. js. ‘omin
ca (oxide): per hour up toa
Sometimes used in maximum thickness
memory storage or - pt Silicon substrate of about 40 A.
film passivation.

Gate Oxide Serves as a dielectric . Common gate oxide
between the gate and Gate oxide /Gaté| film thickness range
source-drain parts of Source / U Drain from about 20 A to
MOS transistor. Transistor site several hundred A. Dry

p* Silicon substrate thermal oxidation is the

preferred growth
method.


===== page_230 =====
“Application
Field Oxide

Purpose

Serves as an isolation
barrier between
individual transistors
to isolate them from
each other.

. of

. Structure

Field oxide

Transistor site
p* Silicon substrate

Comments

Common field oxide
film thickness ranges
from 2,500 A to
15,000 A. Wet
oxidation is the
preferred growth
method.

Barrier Oxide

Protects active devices
and silicon from
follow-on processing.

Diffused resistors
pt Silicon substrate

Thermally grown to
several hundred
angstroms thickness.

Dopant Barrier

Masking material for
depositing or

Dopants diffuse into
unmasked areas of

: Dopant

implanting dopants barrier | | | | | littiisgtttp ry silicon by selective
into wafer. spacer oxide \ lon implantation diffusion.

Gate
- st
7
Spacer oxide protects narrow
channel from high-energy implant
Pad Oxide Provides stress Passivation Layer Bonding pad metal Thermally grown and

reduction for silicon

very thin.

nitride (Si₃N₄).
Implant Screen Used to reduce implant Screen Thermally grown.
Oxide channeling and oxide ~

damage.

obi Pee

p* Silicon substrate

High damage to
upper Si surface
+ more channeling

Low damage to
upper Si surface

+ less channeling

Insulating Barrier
Between Metal
Layers

Serves as a protective
layer between metal
lines.

Bonding pad metal

This oxide is not
thermally grown, but
is deposited.


===== page_231 =====
THERMAL OXIDATION GROWTH

The various applications for thermally grown oxide have different thickness requirements. Silicon
dioxide thickness ranges for different requirements are summarized in Table 10.2. The color chart
in Appendix D shows silicon dioxide color as a function of the film thickness, which was used in
the early days of wafer fabrication to estimate the oxide thickness. Other critical quality parameters
for oxide layers in semiconductor fabrication are thickness, uniformity, pinholes and voids.

“s

TABLE 10.2 Oxide Thickness Ranges for Various Requirements

“A Semiconductor Application es ie a aa ‘Typical Oxi ‘Thiel (
Gate Oxide 0. 18 pm generation)
Capacitor Dielectrics 5-100
Dopant Masking Oxide 400-1,200

(Varies depending on dopant, implant
energy, time, and temperature)

STI Barrier Oxide 150
LOCOS Pad Oxide 200-500
Field Oxide 2,500-15,000

Chemical Reaction for Oxidation

Thermal oxide is grown by a chemical reaction between silicon and oxygen. Uniform oxide growth
is achieved by exposing silicon to elevated temperature in the presence of high-purity oxygen. If
this growth occurs with dry oxygen, meaning no moisture, then the following chemical equation de-
scribes the reaction:

Si (solid) + O₂ (gas) -> SiO₂ (solid)

The time and quality of this reaction varies and is affected by the purity of oxygen gas sup-
plied to the silicon wafer surface and the reaction temperature. It occurs naturally when silicon is
exposed to air at room temperature. The reaction rate is increased with an increase in temperature.
The typical temperature for the oxidation of silicon during wafer fabrication is normally between
750°C to 1100°C and can vary for different oxidation process steps. The furnace temperature at any
one operation is precisely controlled. The rate of oxide thickness for dry oxidation versus temper-
ature and time is shown in Figure 10.6 on page 232.10

Wet Oxidation Mi When water vapor is introduced into the reaction, known as wet oxidation, the
rate of theoxidation reaction is increased further. The chemical reaction for wet oxidation is:

Si (solid) + 2H₂O (vapor) -> SiO₂ (solid) + 2H₂ (gas)

For wet oxidation, oxygen saturated with water vapor is used instead of dry oxygen as the ox-
idizing gas. The water vapor could also be supplied as steam, referred to aspyrogenic steam (see
Figure 10.7 on page 232). A wet oxidation reaction produces a silicon dioxide film and hydrogen
gas during oxidation growth. The faster growth rate in a wet atmosphere is due to the faster diffu-
sion and higher solubility of water vapor than oxygen in silicon dioxide.!! However, the hydrogen
molecules produced in the reaction are trapped in the solid silicon dioxide layer, making the layer
less dense than oxide grown in dry oxygen. This condition can be improved to achieve a similar
oxide in structure and properties such as that produced in dry oxidation by heating the oxide in an
inert atmosphere.

Oxidation 231


===== page_248 =====
have made emissivity less of a factor by utilizing solid-state pyrometers for better reliability and
temperature measurement control.

The RTP has been hampered in the past with poor temperature uniformity across the wafer and
nonequilibrium heating.4” These problems lead to crystal slip and wafer warpage. There have been
significant advances in RTP systems in the past few years, resulting in improved temperature control.

Equipment Integration Mi An RTP introduces flexibility into thermal processing because it can
be integrated with other process steps into a multichamber cluster tool. This is beneficial because
all processing steps occur in a vacuum environment to eliminate concerns with native oxide and
contamination. The movement of single wafers through a cluster tool also reduces the time it takes
to process wafers by reducing the waiting times associated with large wafer batches. Single wafers
can also be processed in parallel with one another. These benefits occur in conjunction with the im-
portant action of reducing the thermal budget of the wafer.

RTP Applications Mi The RTP has become widely used in many processes throughout wafer fab-
rication. Advances in RTP chamber design and temperature uniformity are making this equipment
acceptable with better temperature uniformity across wafers. Examples of operations that often use
the RTP in wafer fabrication are:

¢ Anneal of implants to remove defects and activate and diffuse dopants

Densification of deposited films, such as deposited oxide layers
Borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) reflow
Anneal of barrier layers, such as titanium nitride (TiN)
Silicide formation, such as titanium silicide (TiSi,)

¢--¢- ¢ @

Contact alloying

The first widely used application for RTP processing was annealing after ion implant. The ad-
vantage of using an RTP over a conventional diffusion furnace is that the wafer spends a much
shorter time at temperature, thus reducing the thermal budget. However, the uniform temperature
control of conventional furnaces makes this approach competitive.

OXIDATION PROCESS

The goal of thermal oxidation is the growth of a defect-free, uniform layer of SiO₂ at the thickness
required. The type of oxidation process conditions used for a particular wafer fabrication step de-
pends on the thickness of the oxidation layer and the properties required. Thin oxides, such as gate
oxides, are usually grown in dry oxygen. Because sodium ion contamination is a concern, HCt is
added to the O, supply during the oxidation of high-quality oxides. Where thick oxides are required,
such as the field oxidation layer, then steam is used (HCI is not used in steam oxidation processes).
Higher pressure during the growth process allows thick oxide growth to be achieved at a reduced
temperature in reasonable time periods. The flow illustrated in Figure 10.23 shows the typical steps
for thermal oxidation.

Pre Oxidation Cleaning

Cleanliness of the wafer is critical to achieve high quality oxidation (see Chapter 6). Coritaminants
such as particulates and mobile ionic contaminants (MICs) will have serious impact on device per-
formance and yields. For example, the presence of MICs in the thermally grown gate oxide struc-
ture can result in long-term changes in the device threshold voltage as the MICs drift from the gate
oxide to the Si/SiO₂ interface.“* This condition is detrimental to device electrical performance. For
a thermal oxidation process, the ability to keep MICs and particulate matter out of the system de-
pends on maintaining the system to a high state of cleanliness control. The following areas are crit-
ical for minimizing contamination:

BTR dee


===== page_249 =====
¢@ Maintenance of the furnace and associated equipment (especially quartz components) for
cleanliness

Purity of processing chemicals
¢ Purity of oxidizing ambient (the source of oxygen in the furnace)
@ Wafer cleaning and handling practices

Oxidation Furnace
Wet Clean ¢ Oy, Hy, Ny, Cl Inspection
* Chemicals * Flow rate » Film thickness
* % solution ¢ Exhaust * Uniformity
* Temperature * Temperature * Particles
* Time * Temperature profile * Defects
* Time

FIGURE 10.23 Thermal Oxidation Process Flow Chart

The basic wet-cleaning chemistries that have withstood the test of time are the RCA SC-1 and
SC-2 clean systems and the piranha clean (sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide, and water mixture).
These wafer cleaning methods and their modifications were discussed in Chapter 6. A wide selec-
tion of cleaning equipment is found in the oxidation area of the fab, including manual and auto-
mated wet sinks, ultrasonic systems (megasonics), acid spray processors, and rinser/dryer systems.

Oxidation Process Recipe

For thermal oxidation to occur, certain process conditions are followed in a specific format in the
furnace equipment. This is known as a process recipe. For wafer fabrication, it is common that the
parameters of a process recipe are stored in a software database and downloaded into the tool soft-
ware for a particular wafer lot. We will review a sample process recipe for dry oxidation in a batch
furnace.

Dry Thermal Oxidation Hi The most common reason for dry thermal oxidation is to grow the
very thin layer of oxide used as the gate oxide.’ As the devices become smaller in order to increase
the component density on a chip (following Moore’s law from Chapter 1), then the device dimen-
sions and electrical parameters must also be scaled down proportionally. Gate oxide layers are con-
sidered the most critical oxidation application in wafer fabrication, with a gate oxide thickness on
the order of 20-40 A for 0.18-um devices and 20-30 A for 0.15-~um devices.*° Dry thermal oxida-
tion produces a high-quality oxide that is uniformly dense, free of pinholes, and reproducible. It is
important for gate oxides to be produced in a clean, sodium-free system that is truly dry, since as
little as 25 ppm of water will alter the oxide growth rate and properties of the oxide.*! There is
ongoing research to evaluate other replacement materials that could function as a dielectric in the
gate structure, but there is no suitable alternative in production.


===== page_250 =====
Process Recipe MI Table 10.6 shows a sample process recipe for dry oxidation of a gate oxide.52
During idle conditions, the process recipe shows there is a nitrogen (N,) purge gas introduced into
the chamber. It flows continuously until the process recipe is started and then the purge is turned
off and N, process gas is turned on. Once the furnace tube is loaded, the temperature is raised from
idle at 850°C to 1,000°C at a ramp rate of, 20°C per minute. The wafers have a five-minute stabi-
lization period. Since this is dry oxidation, oxygen at a flow rate of 2.5 slm is introduced into the
process chamber. HC] flows in at 67 sccm and is used to reduce the interface charges and to getter
MICs. During the anneal step, which is done to minimize charge buildup, the O, and HCI are turned
off and N, is turned on. Oxygen still diffuses through the oxide even though the oxide flow has been
cut off, which is taken into account to produce stoichiometric (uniform composition) silicon diox-
ide. A five-minute period is allowed to unload the furnace tube.

TABLE 10.6 Process Recipe for Dry Oxidation Process

850 8.0 0 0 0 Idle condition
1 5 850 8.0 0 0 Load furnace tube
7.5 Ramp 8.0 0 0 Ramp
20°C/nin temperature up
3 5 1000 8.0 0 0 Temperature
stabilization
4 30 1000 0 2.5 67 Dry oxidation
5 30 1000 8.0 0 0 Anneal
6 30 Ramp 8.0 0 0 Ramp
—5°C/min temperature
down
7 5 850 8.0 0 0 Unload furnace
tube
8 850 8.0 0 0 0 Idle

Note: Gas flow units are slm (standard liters per minute) and sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute).

QUALITY MEASUREMENTS

Representative quality measures for thermal oxide growth are listed in Table 10.7.3

é oa

Possible reasons for this problem are: .

e oxide
outside of specification * Incorrect process gas flow
(representative gate oxide (e.g., MFC calibrated

specification is 20 + 1.5 A). improperly). Since HC1

enhances oxidation rate, verify HC1:0,
ratio is correct.

Verify O., leak integrity of the furnace with
a bare silicon test wafer.

Check the metrology equipment by
measuring the oxide thickness against a
standard thickness wafer.

Excess native oxide growth due to overex-
posure of wafer to air either before or after
normal furnace oxidation.


===== page_251 =====
A, Gate oxide breakdown.
B. Mobile ionic contamination
(MIC) in film.

2. Gate oxide
integrity (GOD.

S * Remarks:

Gate oxide defects are often

related to processing conditions:

¢ Perform a C-V test to demonstrate gate
oxide integrity using an unpatterned test
wafer.

¢ Perform an oxide-charge analysis on a test
wafer with a surface-charge analyzer.

* Review the preoxidation clean steps to
assess sources of contamination (e.g.,
particles or MICs).

¢ Verify no contamination from an incoming
gas line or defective filter.

3. Particles in the
oxide film.

A, Contaminated quartzware.

C. Contaminated cartier.
D. Contaminated gas filter
or line.

B. Wafer broken inside furnace.

Actions to correct these sources

of particles added during the

oxidation process are:

* Check cleanliness of quartzware and
carrier.

* Verify the alignment of the robotic handling
systems.

* Check incoming gas filters.

4, Particles under the
oxide film.

A. Contaminated preoxidation
clean.

Source of particles prior to the oxidation

step are:

* Verify the preoxidation clean steps are prop-
erly set up and performed. °

* Check cleanliness of quartzware and carrier.

When a batch of wafers is loaded into a furnace tube for oxidation, a number of test wafers
with bare surfaces (also referred to as unpatterned wafers, as described in Chapter 19) are placed at
strategic locations in the tube (see Figure 10.24). These test wafers are used to perform the various
evaluations after the oxidation step to ensure the oxide has acceptable quality.

Boat size: 161 wafers

FIGURE 10.24 Wafer
Loading Pattern in Vertical

é . Boat pitch: 0.14 inch Furnace
i ission from
Calibration parameters:€ Wafer size: 8 inches {Used ath en Mi, ach)

Elevator speed: 9.29 cm/min

JLiL_4

ILL

Lu

1 Test wafer

1 Test wafer

1 Test wafer
4 Filler (dummy) wafers

Cool down delay: 20 minutes

4 Filler (dummy) wafers

75 Production wafers

75 Production wafers

251


===== page_252 =====
OXIDATION TROUBLESHOOTING

Common problems and corrective actions for thermal oxidation are described in Table 10.8.

TABLE 10.8 Common Oxidation Troubleshooting Problems

_ Problem _
1. Incorrect gas flow
into furnace tube.

"Probable Causes
A,
B. Malfunctioning MFC.

Incorrect process recipe.

C. Incorrect H,:O, ratio for

steam process (O, starved).

‘Corrective Actions:

Possible corrective actions for this

problem are:

« Verify that correct process recipe
is downloaded into furnace software for
for the wafer being processed.

¢ Check process gas MFCs (O,, N,, H,, Cl)
to verify calibration was performed and
operating properly.

* Verify gas valves are functioning properly
(e.g., no leaks, and so on).

« Check that no room air is leaking into the
furnace tube from outside the quartz or fur-
nace door seal.

2. ‘Incorrect A. Wrong process recipe for Possible corrective actions are:
temperature product. * Verify that the correct process recipe
uniformity in B. Incorrect operation of is loaded for the wafer being processed.
vertical furnace thermocouples. ¢ Assess whether the temperature
chamber. nonuniformity is during the ramp up, flat
zone, and ramp down for corrective action.
¢ Check all thermocouples for proper opera-
tion. Verify no degradation due to excessive
heat or corrosion. Replace defective ther-
mocouples. Verify no drift in thermocouple
reference temperature.
3. Inadequate A. Malfunctioning heating Possible corrective actions are:

temperature
uniformity in rapid
thermal processor
(RTP).

system (e.g., tungsten
halogen lamps).

. Verify correct operation of

of temperature measurement

* Verify heating lamps are operating
and have the correct lamp intensity.

* Verify correct calibration and
temperature measurement of the optical

sensor.

pyrometer temperature sensor. Check there
is no variation in wafer emissivity by per-
forming reflectivity measurement of the
water surface.

SUMMARY

Silicon dioxide (or oxide) can be thermally grown or
deposited on a wafer. SiO₂ has a tetrahedron cell atomic
structure of a silicon atom surrounded by four oxygen
atoms and is amorphous. Five uses of oxide film in
wafer fabrication are (1) protection and isolation, (2)
passivation, (3) dielectric, (4) dopant mask and (5) de-
posited insulator between metal layers. The thickness of
an oxide layer depends on its applications. The chemi-
cal reaction for thermally grown dry oxide requires sil-
icon and an oxidizer gas, consumes silicon during the
reaction, and is speeded up with the use of wet oxida-
tion. There is an undesirable oxide charge at the Si/SiO₂
interface that can be neutralized by the use of HCl. The
growth of thermal oxide follows a linear growth stage
up to about 150 A, followed by a slower parabolic
growth stage. Factors affecting the oxide growth rate
are dopants, crystal orientation, pressure, and tempera-
ture. SiO₂ can be selectively grown or deposited.

The three basic types of thermal processing
equipment are a horizontal furnace, vertical furnace,
and rapid thermal processor (RTP). The vertical furnace
has become the primary batch furnace in fabrication. It
consists of a process chamber, wafer transfer system,
gas distribution system, exhaust system, and tempera-
ture control system. Chamber materials are made of
quartz or silicon carbide. The temperature is precisely
controlled with the use of multiple thermocouples. The
goal in thermal processing is to minimize the thermal
budget. Fast-ramp vertical furnaces quickly ramp the
temperature up or down with a smaller batch of wafers
by using advanced temperature control. The rapid ther-
mal processor (RTP) can reduce the thermal budget by
heating wafers with ramp rates of up to hundreds of de-
grees per second and is often integrated with other
process steps. Preoxidation cleaning is critical for at-
taining a high-quality oxide.

in es


===== page_260 =====
Metal Layers in a Chip
(Micrograph courtesy of Integrated Circuit Engineering)

important function of the ILD-1 layer is to isolate transistor devices in two ways: electrically from
the metal interconnect layers, and physically from contamination sources such as mobile ions. The
ILD-1 has a restricted thermal budget in high-performance logic devices in order to avoid degrad-
ing transistor characteristics.°

The interlayer dielectric (ILD) is used between different metal layers in the device. The ILD
serves as an insulating film between two conducting metals or adjacent metal lines. The ILD has
traditionally been silicon dioxide (SiO₂) with a dielectric constant of around 3.9 to 4.0.4 The di-
electric constant is an important property of deposited insulating films because it directly affects
circuit speed performance (see the following section). ;

FILM DEPOSITION

A thin film is a thin, solid layer of a material created on a substrate. If a solid material has three di-
mensions (thickness, width, and length), then a thin solid film has one of its dimensions (usually
thickness) much smaller than the other two (see Figure 11.4). The thin film is bonded to a wafer
substrate, which has a much thicker dimension than the film. The thin-film surface is so close to the
substrate that it has a profound influence on the physical, mechanical, chemical, and electrical prop-
erties of the thin film material.> The most widely used unit to describe the thickness of a thin film
in wafer fabrication is the angstrom (A).

Thin film deposition in semiconductor fabrication is any process that physically deposits a
film on the wafer substrate. The film can be either a conducting, insulating, or semiconducting ma-
terial. Examples of deposited films are polysilicon, silicon dioxide (SiO₂), silicon nitride (Si₃N₄),
polysilicon (silicon in a polycrystalline structure), and metals such as copper and refractory metals
(e.g., tungsten).

Thin-Film Characteristics

For a thin film to be acceptable in wafer fabrication, it must have desirable film characteristics.
General characteristics of an acceptable thin film for device performance are:®

Good step coverage

¢ Ability to fill high aspect ratio gaps (conformality)

Good thickness uniformity

High purity and density


===== page_261 =====
Thickness ,
Thin films are very thin in
Width | comparison to the substrate.

Ry

?

Oxide

Silicon substrate

FIGURE 11.4 Solid Thin Film

¢ Controlled stoichiometries

¢ High degree of structural perfection with low film stress

¢ Good electrical properties

¢ Excellent adhesion to the substrate material and subsequent films

Film-Step Coverage Mi It is desirable for thin films to maintain a uniform thickness over surface
features (see Figure 11.5). Steps on the wafer surface occur due to three-dimensional shapes from
patterned features that create surface topography. If the film thins excessively at a step, this can
cause high stress, electrical shorts, or undesirable induced charges in the device. Films with mini-
mum stress are important, since stress can lead to substrate deformation in a convex or concave
shape. All deposition techniques result in the formation of some stress in films.

Uniform thickness ‘
4 —_

>

Conformal step coverage |___Nonconformal step coverage _
FIGURE 11.5 Film Coverage Over Steps

High Aspect Ratio Gaps Mi A small gap (trench or hole) is characterized by its aspect ratio,
which is defined as the ratio of its depth to width (see Figure 11.6 on page 262). Aspect ratio is ex-
pressed as a ratio, such as 2:1, which in this case means the gap depth is two times the width. A gap
can also be specified by its opening width, such as 0.25 jum, which may be different than the CD
of other structures on the wafer. The ability to fill very small gaps and holes on the surface of the
wafer has become one of the most important film characteristics for devices fabricated with sub-
0.25 micron geometries. Examples of gaps that require effective gap-fill capability are vias passing
through the interlayer dielectric (ILD) and trenches for shallow trench isolation (STI).’ A high
aspect ratio is typically above 3:1, with some applications having aspect ratios of 5:1 or larger. High
aspect ratio gaps make it difficult to uniformly deposit the film, leading to pinch-off and voiding.
Deposition processes that can produce uniform, void-free films in high aspect ratio openings are
critical in the sub-0.25 jum era of high-density IC circuits with shrinking geometries.

Thickness Uniformity MI Acceptable thin films are conformal with good thickness uniformity,
which means the film follows the outline of the base material in all areas. The resistance of a ma-
terial will change with varying thickness, which would be undesirable. Thinner layers of film also


===== page_262 =====
_ _ Depth 500A _ y.
Aspect Ratio = Width Aspect Ratio 50k 2:1

High Aspect Ratio Gap
(Micrograph Courtesy of Integrated Circuit Engineering)

tend to have more defects such as pinholes, which leads to less mechanical strength. It is desirable
for thin films to have good surface flatness to minimize steps and cracking.

Film Purity and Density Mf High film purity means that the film does not have any unwanted
chemical elements or molecules, which is important if the film is to function properly. This includes
the avoidance of contaminants such as mobile ionic contaminants (MICs) and particulates. The oc-
currence of film contaminants such as hydrogen can degrade film properties. The density of the film
is an important indicator of film quality because it means the film is free of pinholes and voids. A
porous film has lower density and in some instances a lower refractive index than a nonporous film.

Stoichiometry Mi A desirable film will have uniform composition. As chemicals undergo change
in a reaction, stoichiometry describes how the quantities of reactants and products are produced
once the reaction ends or stabilizes. Stoichiometry is the ratio of one component amount to another
component amount in a compound or molecule (e.g., the H₂O stoichiometric ratio is 2:1). If you
know what is in a reaction, then stoichiometry tells you how much of the ingredients was needed.
The chemical reactions that occur in deposition are complex and can lead to films that have a dif-
ferent composition than intended. A goal in deposition is to have the correct quantity of molecules
in the reaction so that the deposited film approaches the ratio of the elements in the nominal chem-
ical formula of the incoming gas.

Film Structure Mf The film structure is critical, especially related to the grain size. Materials tend
to collect and grow as grains during the deposition process. If the grain size varies in a film, then it


===== page_263 =====
will have varying electrical and mechanical properties that can affect the long-term reliability of the
film, especially concerning electromigration (discussed in Chapter 12).8 The growth of a film can
cause undesirable stress in the film layer that deforms the wafer substrate, leading to film cracking,
delamination or void formation. An example of this condition is hydrogen contamination in nitride
film deposition, which leads to a compressive stress.? The objective during film deposition is al-
ways to minimize the amount of stress.

Film Adhesion @ Film adhesion to the substrate material is important for thin films to avoid de-
lamination and cracking. A cracked film can cause surface roughness and allows contamination to

. pass through the film. For insulating films, cracks can lead to electrical shorts or current-leakage
paths. Adhesion of a film to a surface is determined by the cleanliness of the surface and also by
the type of material to which the film can alloy. Metals such as chromium, titanium, and cobalt are
often useful for their adhesion properties (see Chapter 12). Good adhesion of films in multilevel
metallization is critical to maintaining the overall electrical and mechanical integrity of the struc-
ture. This is true in the as-deposited condition and after subsequent processing.

Film Growth

A deposited film grows in three distinct stages (see Figure 11.7).!° The first stage is nucleation
where clusters of stable nuclei are formed. This stage occurs when the first few atoms or molecules
of the reactants combine to form isolated patches of film that attach to the wafer surface. Nucleation
occurs directly on the wafer and is essential to further thin film growth. The second stage is the nu-
clei coalescence into clusters, also referred to as island growth. These randomly oriented island
clusters grow based on surface mobility and the density of the cluster. The island clusters continue
to grow and eventually develop into the third stage, a continuous film where they meet and form a
solid sheet that spreads across the substrate surface.

Gas molecules

© .]
e 990 Oo
0° S

Nucleation Coalescence Continuous film

_ @&
ae —

FIGURE 11.7 Stages of Film Growth

The size of the individual cluster, before meeting a neighboring cluster, is related to the sur-
face mobility of the reacting species and the density of the nuclei. A high surface mobility and/or
low nucleation rate promote the formation of relatively large clusters. This condition generally
leads to polycrystalline films with short-range crystal order. On the other hand, low surface mobil-
ity combined with a high nucleation rate leads to amorphous film growth with no short-range
order.!! Low deposition temperatures usually favor amorphous films because the low thermal en-
ergy slows the surface mobility of the reacting materials.

Deposited films can be amorphous, polycrystalline or single crystalline.!? Semiconductor
films are used in all three forms. Insulator or metal films are usually amorphous or polycrystalline.
Silicon deposited on an oxide layer is polycrystalline, as in the polysilicon used in the gate struc-
ture. Epitaxial single-crystal films are necessary for reliable semiconductor properties. To obtain a
single-crystal deposited film, it is deposited on a single-crystal wafer substrate.

Deposition 263


===== page_292 =====
CVD QUALITY MEASURES

Important quality measures for CVD are listed in Table 11.7.

TABLE 11.7 Key Quality Measures for CVD

Quality Parameter

1. Voids during deposition
of high-aspect ratio gap

(>3:1) with PECVD SiO₂.

~ ‘Types of Defects”

A. Keyhole voids are formed

during deposition of high
aspect ratio gaps. After
chemical mechanical
planarization (CMP) and
removal of top surface,
some voids become
trenches (see Figure 11.31
on page 294).

This trench can lead to an
open circuit after metal
deposition.

"Remarks

° Gap fill is critical as CDs are
reduced and gaps have a high
aspect ratio.

* Voids are highly stressed regions
and trap moisture or solvents that
cause corrosion or outgas at
high vacuum.

¢ The root cause of this problem is
trying to fill a high aspect ratio
gap with a PECVD that is limited
to deposition system. This
application requires HDPCVD.

2. Film stress.

. High film stress leads to
cracking and delamination.
. Film stress can propagate

silicon defects in the
substrate.

. Stress may cause current

leakage.

The presence of dopant in a glass film

can reduce stress. Deposition

parameters that affect film stress are:

¢ RF power: adjust power to improve
stress (e.g., reduce power by 10
watts to lower stress).

¢ Pressure: adjust pressure to affect
stress (e.g. increased pressure leads to
higher film stress).

3. Film thickness.

. Thickness of film exceeds

requirements.

Deposition parameters that affect

thickness are:

* Time: reduce deposition time to
reduce thickness (e.g., 1 sec
reduction for each 100 A of
thickness).

* Gas-flow rate: reduce gas flow to
reduce thickness (e.g., reduce SiH,
by 2 sccm for >5% thickness over
nominal).

4. Refractive index (R/I).

. R/Tis a good monitor to

assess quality of the film.

B. R/Lis highly dependent on

the composition of the
deposited film
(stoichiometry).

R/1 is an optical property of a material.
Compared to thermal oxides, CVD
oxides are inferior in quality and
integrity. CVD oxides exhibit more
particles and pinholes. The R/I of CVD
SiO₂ can be compared to the RA

of SiO₂ (1.46) to assess relative quality:
* High R/I means excessive Si in film.

* Low RAI indicates a porous film,
which tends to absorb moisture.

CVD TROUBLESHOOTING

Troubleshooting techniques for common CVD problems are described in Table 11.8. Plasma depo-
sition systems have two areas of safety: chemical and electrical. Many plasmas use toxic gases
(see Appendix A, Table A.3). There are high voltages and RF energy in the RF power supplies. Use
caution when troubleshooting CVD systems.


===== page_293 =====
TABLE 11.8 Common CVD Troubleshooting Problems

Deposition

ody. Problem
{. Particle contamination
associated with film.

- Probable Cause

Source of particles is isolated
by determining whether
particles are found on top

of film, in film, or below film:

A. On film: particles formed
after deposition. Check for
particles on sidewalls of
hot-wall reactors and
belt-driven reactors.

B. In film: Gas-phase
nucleation particles from
gas too rich in silane or
silicon. Gas supply
contamination causes
particles.

.| C. Under film: Particles from

silicon carbide, quartz, or
reactor walls fall on wafer
before deposition.

Corrective Action

Particles on film: Particles on
sidewalls indicate need for more
frequent wet cleaning of quartzware
and chamber surfaces for
preventive maintenance. Inspect

in situ dry cleaning process. Also
verify the correct procedures for
cleaning (manually or in situ).
Particles in film: Improper gas
flows from MFC calibration or
problem in process recipe of
software program. Check for leaks
in gas supply system or O-rings.
Verify point-of-use filters are
acceptable.

Particles under film: Check wafer
cleaning process before deposition.

2. Film thickness.

Thickness is related to both

equipment and process

problems. Variables affecting

thickness are:

A. Incorrect temperature
control.

B. System pressure is too
high or low.

C. System power needs
adjustment.

D. Improper gas flow.

Temperature controller may require
calibration. A common problem is a
defective thermocouple.

System pressure is controlled by
process recipe. Check vacuum system
for leaks.

Adjust RF power to optimize film
thickness.

Check calibration of MFC to ensure
proper gas flow. ,
If checking thickness with test wafer,
verify the test wafer is clean and does
not have a thickness variation before
the test.

3. Cracking of dielectric
material on top of

electrostatic chuck (ESC).

High thermal load at the ESC
causes the dielectric material
to erode or crack. This
condition leads to plasma
arcing or wafer chucking/
dechucking problems.

Investigate the ESC backside
cooling system to ensure it

is functioning properly.

Inspect ESC materials to verify
there is no breakdown due to high
power exposure, temperature, or
plasma clean conditions.

293


===== page_294 =====
Keyhole defect in —-~
interlayer dielectric

Aluminum —~

Si0n —

{

b) SiO₂ is planarized

Metal void caused by keyhole defect in SiO₂

c) Next layer of aluminum is deposited

FIGURE 11.31 Effects of Keyholes in ILD on Metal Step Coverage

SUMMARY

Multilevel metallization with dielectric and metal lay-
ers is necessary for advanced ICs. Thin films have spe-
cial characteristics to meet the requirements for wafer
fabrication, including high aspect ratio gap fill. A film
grows in stages from a cluster of nuclei to a continuous
film. There is a wide range of tools for depositing film
layers, with the focus on dielectric chemical vapor dep-
osition (CVD). CVD deposits a thin film on the wafer
surface through a chemical reaction that is assisted by
thermal or plasma energy. CVD surface reactions in-
clude pyrolosis, oxidation, and reduction. The CVD
chemical reaction follows defined steps and can be lim-
ited by the supply of chemicals or by the nature of the
surface reaction. The thin film is sometimes doped to
obtain improved performance. Reactors for CVD are
categorized by atmospheric pressure CVD (APCVD),
low pressure CVD (LPCVD), or plasma-assisted CVD.
APCVD is simple in design and is primarily used to de-
posit conformal oxide with a TEOS-O, process.

LPCVD deposits various films, including oxide, silicon
nitride, and polysilicon. The LPCVD process is reaction-
rate limited (gas flow is not critical) and often occurs at
lower temperatures. Plasma-assisted CVD is divided into
plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) and high-density
plasma CVD (HDPCVD). PECVD was the first plasma-
assisted CVD but had limited use for filling gaps less
than 0.5 ym. HDPCVD is used for advanced ICs because
of its excellent gap-fill capability for high-aspect ratios
at relatively low temperatures. The deposited dielectric
material increases chip performance by reducing the
RC interconnect delay with a low-k dielectric. Dielectric
material is also important for isolation technologies.
Dielectric materials have been applied in liquid form
by spinning, which may be an application method for
future low-k dielectrics. Epitaxy is grown primarily by
CVD methods, including vapor-phase epitaxy (VPE), met-
alorganic CVD (MOCVD), and molecular-beam epitaxy.


===== page_342 =====
EIGHT BASIC STEPS OF PHOTOLITHOGRAPHY

Photolithography is a complex process with many variables contributing to its process latitude, such
as reduced feature size, alignment tolerance, number of masking layers, and cleanliness of the wafer
surface. For convenience, we can divide the patterning process of photolithography into an eight-
step procedure (see Table 13.2). Figure 13.9 provides a pictorial overview of the eight process steps.
In the wafer fab these steps are often referred to as operations. Breaking the large photo process into
these eight steps simplifies the various aspects of microlithography. This chapter will first provide
a short overview of the eight basic steps, followed by an in-depth analysis of the materials, equip-
ment, and processes used in each photolithography step. The in-depth analyses of the steps are cov-
ered at the end of this chapter and in the following three chapters. Table 13.2 indicates the specific
steps that are covered in a chapter.

TABLE 13.2 Eight Steps of Photolithography

1. Vapor prime 13
2. Spin coat 13
3. Soft bake 13
4, Alignment and exposure 14
5. Post-exposure bake (PEB) 15
6. Develop 15
7. Hard bake 15
8. Develop inspect 15

UV Light

oe using
ee

Resist Mask f th

ae

1) Vapor prime 2) Spin coat 3) Soft bake 4) Alignment
and exposure

5) Post-exposure 6) Develop 7) Hard bake 8) Develop inspect
bake

FIGURE 13.9 Eight Steps of Photolithography

The photolithography process has undergone significant equipment integration. Automated
equipment, referred to as a coater/developer track system, or tracks, employs robots, automated
material handling, and computers to perform all eight steps without human intervention. Integrated
tracks offer many benefits over the previous stand-alone manual tooling for photolithography. This
integration improved process control by controlling delays between process steps, processing
wafers efficiently, increasing flexibility, reducing contamination due to environmental control and
minimal operator handling, and increasing safety due to reduced operator exposure to chemicals.


===== page_343 =====
Photolithography Track System
(Photo courtesy of Advanced Micro Devices)

Step 1: Vapor Prime

The first step in photolithography is to clean, dehydrate, and prime the surface of the wafer. The
purpose of these steps is to promote good adhesion between the photoresist and the wafer surface.

Wafer cleaning may involve a wet clean and DI water rinse to remove contaminants, Most
wafer cleaning is performed before entering the photolithography workbay. A dehydration dry bake
is done in a closed chamber to drive off most of the adsorbed water on the surface of the wafer. The
wafer surface must be clean and dry. Immediately after the dehydration bake, the wafer is primed
with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), which acts as an adhesion promoter.

Step 2: Spin Coat

After priming, the wafer is coated with the liquid photoresist material by a spin coating method. The
wafer is mounted on a vacuum chuck, which is a flat metal or teflon disc that has small vacuum
holes on its surface to hold the wafer. A precise amount of liquid photoresist is applied to the wafer
and then the wafer is spun to obtain a uniform coating of resist on the wafer (see Figure 13.10).

Different resists require different spin coating conditions, such as an initial slow spin (e.g.,
500 rpm), followed by a ramp up to a maximum rotational speed of 3,000 rpm or higher. Some im-
portant quality measures for photoresist application are time, speed, thickness, uniformity, particu-
late contamination, and resist defects such as pinholes.

Process Summary:
* Wafer.is held onto vacuum chuck
* Dispense ~ Sml of photoresist
Slow spin ~ 500 rpm
Ramp up to ~ 3000 to 5000 rpm
* Quality measures:

— time

— speed

~ thickness

~ uniformity

~ particles and defects

Photoresist
dispenser

Spindle connected
to spin motor

FIGURE 13.10 Spin Coat


===== page_344 =====
Step 3: Soft Bake

After the resist has been applied to the wafer surface, it must undergo a soft bake. The purpose of
this bake is to drive off most of the solvent in the resist. The soft bake process improves adhesion,
promotes resist uniformity on the wafer, and yields better linewidth control during etching. Typical
soft bake temperatures are 90 to 100°C for 30 seconds on a hot plate, followed by a cooling step on
a cool plate to achieve wafer temperature control for uniform resist characteristics.

Step 4: Alignment and Exposure

The next step is referred to as alignment and exposure. The mask is aligned to the correct location
of the resist-coated silicon wafer. The wafer surface could be bare silicon but usually has an exist-
ing pattern previously defined on its surface. Once aligned, the mask and wafer are exposed to con-
trolled UV light to transfer the mask image to the resist-coated wafer (see Figure 13.11). The light
energy activates the photosensitive components of the photoresist. Important quality measures for
alignment and exposure are linewidth resolution, overlay accuracy, and particles and defects.

UV light source

Process Summary;

« Transfers the mask image to the
resist-coated wafer

* Activates photo-sensitive
components of photoresist

* Quality measures:
— linewidth resolution
~ overlay accuracy
— particles and defects

FIGURE 13.11 Alignment and Exposure

Step 5: Post-Exposure Bake (PEB)

There is a post-exposure bake on a hot plate at 100 to 110°C that is necessary for the deep UV
(DUV) resists. This bake follows immediately after the photoresist exposure. A few years ago, it
was an optional step for non-DUV conventional resists, but it has become a virtual standard even
for conventional resists.

Step 6: Develop

Develop is the critical step for creating the pattern in the photoresist on the wafer surface. The sol-
uble areas of the photoresist are dissolved by liquid developer chemicals, leaving visible patterns
of islands and windows on the wafer surface. The most common methods for development are spin,
spray, and puddle (see Figure 13.12). Following development, the wafers are rinsed in deionized
(DI) water and then spin-dried.

Step 7: Hard Bake

A post-development thermal bake, referred to as hard bake, is required to evaporate the remaining
photoresist solvent and improve the adhesion of the resist to the wafer surface. This is the critical
step for stabilizing the resist for the following etch or implant processing. The hard bake tempera-
ture for positive resists is about 120 to 140°C. This is a higher temperature than soft bake, but it
cannot be too high or else the resist will flow and deform the pattern.

4


===== page_345 =====
Process Suminary:
* Soluble areas of photoresist are
dissolved by developer chemical
* Visible patterns appear on wafer
~ windows
~ islands
* Quality measures:
— line resolution
— uniformity
— particles and defects

»~ Develop

dispenser

‘Vacuum chuck

Spindle connected
to spin motor

FIGURE 13.12 Photoresist Development

Step 8: Develop Inspect

Once the resist is patterned on the wafer, an inspection is done to verify the quality of the resist pat-
tern. The inspection system is nearly always automated for patterning on highly integrated critical
layers. The purpose of this inspection is twofold: to identify wafers that have quality problems with
the resist and to characterize the performance of the photoresist process to make improvements. If
the resist'is determined to be defective, it can be removed through resist stripping and the wafer can
be reprocessed.

The goal of the photolithography process, as in any manufacturing process, is a defect-free
product. However, it would be catastrophic to not inspect and leave defects in the resist. Develop
inspect is one of the few areas in the wafer fabrication process where errors can be detected and
corrected. Once defective wafers are moved to the next patterning step, usually etch, then there is
no further chance to correct mistakes. If a wafer is etched incorrectly, it has a fatal defect, is con-
sidered scrap, and is of no further value to the company. This is why inspection data to character-
ize and improve the photoresist process is so important.

VAPOR PRIME

To successfully manufacture integrated circuits, wafers must be meticulously clean at all steps of
the wafer fabrication process. Cleaning steps are necessary due to the inevitable contamination that
occurs during storage and handling between process steps. Wafer surface preparation is critical to
achieving a high-yield photolithography process, since many types of defects can be traced back to
contaminated wafers.

Wafer Cleaning

The first step of photolithography is to clean and prepare the surface of the wafer, usually before the
wafers arrive at the photolithography workbay. Wafer contaminants and the appropriate cleaning
processes were discussed in Chapter 6. As a review, undesirable surface contaminants are particles,
metallic impurities, organic contamination, and native oxide. There are many sources of these con-
taminants, including people, process chemicals, process equipment, packaging and storage, wafer
handling methods, and environmental conditions. Thin layers of contaminants on the wafer can con-
sist of ionic (metallic) impurities and atomic and polymeric (organic) layers, which are all difficult
to detect. Refer to Chapter 6 for a discussion of types of contamination and cleaning processes.

One of the major effects of contaminants on the wafer surface during photolithography is
poor adhesion of the photoresist to the wafer. This condition creates a yield problem of resist lift-
ing during development or the subsequent etch operation. Resist lifting leads to undercutting of the
underlying film layer during the etch process (see Figure 13.13 on page 346). Particulate contami-
nation in the resist can lead to uneven resist coating and pinholes in the resist.


===== page_362 =====
PHOTORESIST QUALITY MEASURES

Quality measures for photoresist processing are provided in Table 13.6.

TABLE 13.6 Key Quality Measures for Photoresist

Quality Parameter

1. Resist adhesion.

‘Types of Defects

A. Resist dewetting, which is also

called lift-off. The resist does not
adhere to the substrate, causing
problems during subsequent etch
or ion implantation processing.

_. Remarks...

Possible causes of resist lift-off are:

Contamination on wafer surface.
Inadequate HMDS priming or
dehydration bake resulting in
moisture on wafer surface
(measured by contact angle meter
as described in Chapter 7).
Excessive HMDS priming can

' cause resist “popping,” which is

failure of poorly adhered resist.
SiO₂ is a difficult surface to
achieve good adhesion because it
is a hydrophilic surface (water
attracting).*

2. General quality of
resist coating on wafer.

. Pinholes (very small holes) in the

resist.

Particulate contamination on
mask/reticle (evident after
exposure) or on wafer. Check
surface preparation cleaning.

. Splashback (drops of resist fall

on resist coating).

Improper exhaust level in
spin coater.

Adjust vacuum suckback on
dispense nozzle to stop drops
from forming and dripping on
resist.

. Resist skinning (thin layer of

insoluble resist dried on top of
resist coating).

Spin rate is too high. High spin
speeds can cause striations (lines)
in the resist.

Exhaust rate too high in spin
coater.

For DUV resists, ensure coated
resist is not exposed to amines
inside track system (check carbon
filtration).

3. Thickness of resist
coating.

. Coated resist thickness is out of

control. Resist thickness must be
uniform: wafer-to-wafer mean
thickness requirement is often
<30 A total indicated runout
(TIR, which is maximum minus
minimum thickness).

Parameters that affect thickness
of resist are:

Check spin acceleration and
speed. Higher spin speeds
produce thinner resist (recall

that thickness is inversely
proportional to the square root of
spin speed). Verify spin speed
versus thickness characteristic
curve of resist manufacturer. At
low spin speeds, irregular solvent
loss leads to thickness
nonuniformity.

Verify correct spin time. Resist
reaches stable thickness in several
seconds and requires additional
time for thickness uniformity.
Check for correct resist type and
viscosity.

Verify no mechanical vibration or
air turbulence during high speed
spin dry.

* B. Smith, “Resist Processing,” Microlithography, Science and Technology, ed. J. Sheats and B. Smith,
(New York: Marcel Dekker, 1998), p. 529.


===== page_363 =====
PHOTORESIST TROUBLESHOOTING

Common troubleshooting problems for photoresist are provided in Table 13.7.

TABLE 13.7 Common Photoresist Troubleshooting Problems

Problem

i. Excessive resist usage

during spin coating
(DUV resist costs
$2,000 to $5,000 per
gallon).

Probable Cause..
A. Sub-optimum setting of process
variables during spin coating
process.*

Corrective Actions

Optimize process variables for

spin coating:

* First, determine minimum volume
of resist needed to coat the wafer
(referred to as cut-off volume).

* Second, evaluate the following
critical parameters using design of
experiments: dispense spin speed,
exhaust flow rate during dispense
and drying steps, dispense rate,
resist temperature, cool plate
temperature, and ambient air
temperature.

B. Improper spin coater tool setup.

Check the spin coater setup for the

following:

* Incorrect nozzle size, height, or
position.

* Calibration of coater equipment.

* Wrong software process recipe for
wafer.

. Wafers damaged
(broken or chipped)
during normal
processing in the
wafer track.

A. Improper setup of different tools
used in track for processing
wafers.

Check the following equipment for

proper setup:

* Improper calibration of robot
arms during wafer handoff from
one track tool to another.

* Loss of chuck vacuum during spin.
¢ Spin coat machine is not leveled
properly and has mechanical

vibration.

* Excessive spin speed.

¢ Verify calibration of cassette in-
dexer to index wafers in cassette
for robot pickup.

¢ Warped cassettes cause
equipment malfunction.

. DNQ-novolak resist
becomes unstable and
contaminated with
articles,

A. DNQ-novolak resist has aged
due to shelf life.

Excessive shelf life of DNQ-novolak
resist (> several months, with
maximum of six months to one

year) can lead to the following:**

¢ Increase in absorption at longer
wavelengths.

* Susceptible to thermal degradation
of the DNQ, leading to crosslink-
ing and increase of high molecular-
weight resist components.

¢ Formation of undesirable acids in
the resist.

¢ Precipitation (falling out of
solution) of sensitizer to form
crystallized particles that
contaminate resists. This
especially occurs at high-
temperature storage.

¢ Point-of-use filtration is common
practice for production applica-
tions to control resist consistency.
Typical filter size is 0.05 jm for
0.25 um feature size.

* B. Lorefice et al., “How to Minimize Resist Usage During Spin Coating,” Semiconductor International
(June 1998): p. 182.
** B, Smith, “Resist Processing,” Microlithography, Science and Technology, ed. J. Sheats and B. Smith,


===== page_407 =====
ALIGNMENT AND EXPOSURE QUALITY MEASURES

Typical quality measures for alignment and exposure are provided in Table 14.8.

TABLE 14.8 Key Quality Measures for Exposure

oy st

Quality Parameter | - Types of Defects _ _ Remarks.
1. Focus-exposure dose. A. Incorrect focus-exposure ¢ Verify uniform and optimum expo-
for system. Conduct focus- sure from illumination source.
exposure optimization test while |* Make CD measurements of line

measuring CD linewidth. versus a series of exposure dose
values for a nominal focal position
(e.g., 30% from top surface).

¢ With nominal focal position, find
optimum dose for producing CD.

¢ Modify focal position and conduct
CD measurements. Wide range
of acceptable dose exposure at
optimum focal position.

* Verify the bulk resist meets ail
quality parameters.

2. Light intensity of A. Non-uniform light intensity in | * Check light intensity for specified
illumination source. the exposure field. energy and uniformity at several

locations on a wafer. Most aligners
have built-in photodetector
(measures in mW/cm”),

¢ Evaluate resist to ensure it is not
outgassing and condensing on
optical elements. This will degrade
lens transmission and field unifor-
mity (important for DUV resists).*

3. Reticle alignment in A. Reticle alignment targets will * Verify appropriate process recipe is
Stepper or step-and-scan not align properly with wafer loaded for the specific mask layer.
tool. alignment targets. ¢ Verify appropriate wafers and reticle

are loaded for a specific job.

* Check rotation of reticle on reticle
stage or wafer on wafer stage due to
vacuum leak at chuck or electro-
mechanical problem with stage.

¢ Problem with internal optics of
aligner. Possible cause is tempera-
ture or pressure change that affects
the NA of the lens.

4. Pattern resolution. A. Poor resolution for CDs on Resolution is often a focus problem:
wafer: linewidths and holes do ¢ Perform focus-exposure test.

not meet specification. * Check environment (temperature,

pressure).

¢ Wafer is not flat on chuck, possibly
due to backside contamination or
chuck problem.

* Look for possible incoming process-
related problems or improper
process parameters or reticle.

¢ Look for optics problems (e.g., lens
aberrations).


===== page_408 =====
«i Quality, Par
5. Reticle quality.

Types of Defects
The following are reticle defects:
A. Dirt or scratches on reticle.
B. Pattern defects on reticles:

¢ Break in line.

* Bridge between features.

« Missing geometry.

« Opaque spot from isolated

chrome.

¢ Pinhole in chrome line.
. Glass fracture.
. Lifted chrome (poor adhesion).
. Reticle plate flatness.

mon

¢ Scratches can remove chrome and

cause defect in resist.

¢ Abreak in line extends completely
across the chrome feature.

¢ Bridge will join two chrome features
across a clear space on the reticle.

¢ Missing geometry is a pattern not on
reticle, such as a missing contact.

¢ Opaque spot is an area of chrome
that should not be on reticle.

¢ Pinhole is a hole in a chrome
pattern.

¢ Reticles should not have fractures
and be controlled for flatness and
warpage.

*O. Nalamasu et al., “Single-Layer Resist Design for 193 nm Lithography,” Solid State Technology (May 1999),

p. 29.

ALIGNMENT AND EXPOSURE TROUBLESHOOTING

Troubleshooting problems encountered during alignment and exposure are shown in Table 14.9.

mon Alignment and Exposure Tr

oubleshooting Problems

TABLE 14.9 Com

e a:

af

1. Excessive overlay
error.”

A. Incorrect alignment system
measurement of reticle and
wafer alignment marks

a pre A

Possible measurement error sources are:

* Verify correct process recipe and
reticle is used for a specific mask
layer.

* Verify the calibration and stability of
the alignment system to determine
the position of the alignment marks.

¢ Verify calibration of alignment
mark-to-pattern relationship,
including thermal and/or mechanical
effects.

¢ If error is within one tool, then
optical distortion is probably not
source of problem. If error is tool-
to-tool, check difference in optical
distortion of two different projection
optics.

B. Problem with reticle.

* Verify there is no problem with
reticle mounting and/or reticle
heating that could change alignment
mark-to-pattern position.

¢ Check there is no particulate
contamination on alignment marks
that makes the alignment system
incorrectly determine the mark
position.


===== page_409 =====
a Quality Parameter : ; S ‘Types of Defects .

and reticle.

C. Error in wafer or reticle stage
that holds and positions wafer

- » Remarks.

¢ Wafer and/or reticle stage has
errors in position and rotation during
exposure that contributes to overlay
errors.

¢ Excessive vibration of wafer or
reticle stage. Tools have built-in
vibration and shock isolation.

* Unacceptable wafer or reticle stage
heating that distorts wafer or reticle.

¢ Chucking errors that vacuum clamp
wafers differently and cause wafer
distortion.

D. Problem with projection optics.

¢ Calibration error in the lens
magnification adjustment causes
pattern mismatches.

¢ Focus errors and/or unacceptable
field flatness that causes image
distortion or shifts.

¢ Unacceptable heating causes optics
distortion.

2. Drift in KrF laser

A. Laser properties that can
ak
parameters.

change are:

energy distribution.
¢ Wavelength stability.

¢ Output energy and
repetition rate.

¢ Laser spectral bandwidth and

¢ Pulse-to-pulse energy stability.

All laser measurements and

calibrations should be performed

after specialized training by the

supplier, including:

¢ Use special wavemeter to measure
wavelength. Drift in wavelength
affects focus at the wafer plane.

¢ Assess background optical noise
levels and electronic offsets to
determine impact on energy
distribution.

¢ Measure bandwidth of laser
output using procedure specified
by supplier.

*G, Gallatin, “Alignment and overlay,” Microlithography, Micromachining and Microfabrication vol. 1, ed. J.

Sheats and B. Smith (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1998), p. 318.

**P Das and U. Sengupta, “Krypton Fluoride Excimer Laser for Advanced Microlithography,” Microlithography
Science and Technology ed. J. Sheats and B. Smith (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1998), p. 299.

SUMMARY

Modern photolithography is based on optical lithogra-
phy. Alignment and exposure are critical in lithography
to meet critical submicron resolution requirements.
There have been five photolithography equipment eras.
The step-and-repeat and step-and-scan tools are the pre-
ferred optical lithography tools used today for advanced
IC fabrication. The continued success of optical lithogra-
phy is based on improvements to all subsystems. Light is
important to project the pattern on the resist. UV light at
certain energy peaks creates the photochemical reaction
in the resist. UV exposure sources are the mercury arc
lamp for conventional lithography and the excimer laser
for deep UV. Reflection and refraction are important pa-
rameters for manipulating the light through lens systems
for image projection. Diffraction describes how the light
bends as it passes through the narrow patterns on the ret-
icle. The ability of a lens to capture light is the numerical

aperture (NA). Special antireflective coatings are placed
on the wafer surface to diffuse reflected light and avoid
damage to the light-sensitive resist. Resolution is the
smallest feature printable on the wafer and is limited by
wavelength, NA, and process factors. Reducing pattern
resolution also leads to reduced depth of focus, which
requires a planar wafer surface. This is achieved by
chemical mechanical planarization (CMP). Quartz reti-
cles contain the pattern to be imaged, using a 4X or 5X
reduction optics to simplify reticle fabrication with
e-beam lithography. Optical enhancement techniques
such as phase-shift mask and optical proximity correc-
tion permit subwavelength lithography. Alignment of the
reticle to the wafer is critical for meeting overlay budget
requirements. Environmental conditions must be tightly
controlled for optimum lithography. A mix-and-match
approach uses conventional lithography for noncritical
layers and DUV lithography for critical layers.


===== page_421 =====
left on the wafer for a defined time. This second puddle replenishes the developer chemicals and
rejuvenates the chemical reaction between the developer and the resist. Some manufacturers also
spray the developer onto the wafer during the second puddle application.

After the resist has dissolved in developer, the wafer is rinsed with DI water and spun dry. It
is important to rinse all remaining chemicals after development from both the topside and backside
of the wafer.

For optimal performance, the flow of developer is kept low to reduce variations in develop-
ment rate at the edge of the wafer. This reduction is an advantage of puddle development over spray
because a minimal amount of developer chemical is used. At the same time, adequate developer
volume is needed to achieve full and uniform coverage over the entire wafer. Puddle development
introduces fresh chemicals for every wafer, which improves wafer-to-wafer uniformity. The puddle
development method minimizes temperature gradients and permits control of the variables affect-
ing uniformity of single wafer resist development.

Resist Development Parameters

Critical parameters must be controlled during the development process. These parameters are:

# Developer temperature @ Normality
Developer time @ Rinse
@ Developer volume @ Exhaust flow

@ Wafer chuck

Developer Temperature HM The optimum temperature for developer mixtures is between 15 to
25°C. The temperature must be maintained to within + 1°C or better from the optimal setpoint once
it has been determined. The temperature of the developer has a direct effect on resist dissolution
rate. As previously noted, faster resist dissolution for positive resists occurs at lower developer tem-
peratures. For solvent developers (negative resist), the dissolution rate increases with an increase in
temperature.

Developer Time ™ Developer continues to react with resist until it is removed by a rinse process.
This condition can lead to overdevelopment of the resist and cause unacceptable CD variations.
Off-line analysis of CD resist linewidth can be done on a sample of wafers from a batch to deter-
mine optimum develop time. However, this sampling gives only limited information and is costly.

An in-situ dissolution rate monitor (DRM) is used in automated wafer track systems for real-
time monitoring of the development process.? A DRM uses interferometric signal data collected by
an optical sensor that measures the phase difference of light reflected off the baked-on resist film
surface and the wafer surface underneath. As the resist dissolves, the phase difference between the
two surfaces decreases to zero at the breakthrough point for endpoint (EP) detection. Monitoring
each wafer with a DRM provides more useful information about the develop process and permits
more accurate control of CDs.

Developer Volume ™& The amount of developer volume dispensed on the wafer is critical for suc-
cessful resist development. The use of inadequate developer volume results in scumming, which is
a residue film left on the wafer surface if it has been underdeveloped (such as from inadequate de-
veloper volume) or improperly rinsed. Excessive developer is undesirable because the goal is to re-
duce chemical usage in the fab, Excessive developer is a cost issue, but this condition will not
necessarily ruin the resist on the wafer.

Normality ™§ Normality (N) is a concentration unit that refers to the quantity of substances
(stoichiometry) in a solution. For a particular developer, normality represents the exact chemical
makeup, which in turn indicates how strong or weak the developer is. Normality has a direct effect
on resist dissolution rates. It is primarily altered by the addition of moisture, so the chemical dis-
tribution system must be carefully controlled to minimize leaks.

Rinse & Rinsing is typically done with DI water, which is sprayed onto the wafer, and then the
wafer is spun dry. Rinse serves to stop the development process and also remove developer from
the wafer surface.


===== page_429 =====
Unexposed resist Exposed Crosslinked

Exposed
resist

(a) Normal exposure process (b) Post-exposure bake

Silylated
| exposed resist

(c) Vapor phase silylation (d) Final developed pattern
FIGURE 15.16 Top-Surface Imaging

temperatures. The exposed areas of the resist selectively bond chemically to the silicon to a depth
of 100 to 200 nm.?! The silicon-bonded areas of the resist represent the pattern transfer from the
reticle to the substrate.

The final step is to dry-develop the wafers in oxygen plasma to remove the unprotected
resist. During this plasma etch the silicon is converted into silicon dioxide which forms a thin
protective mask that stops the etch process in the resist directly underneath the SiO₂. This is just
one example of many silylation-based processes. They all essentially use a single-layer patterning
technique that depends on selectively incorporating a silicon-containing compound into the photo-
resist after the exposure step.

DEVELOP QUALITY MEASURES

There are different types of defects found at post-develop inspect. The quality measures are shown
in Table 15.3.

TABLE 15. 3 Key Measures ¢ at t Post-Develop Inspection

Quality Parameter an : Types of Defects . . ‘| 7 a "Remarks.
1. Critical dimensions. A. Wider CDs than normal. ° Improper stepper focus.
¢ Not enough time or energy during
exposure.

* Not enough develop time or weak
developer solution.

* Incorrect process recipes during
exposure or develop steps.


===== page_430 =====
| |S. Types'of Defects.
B.

Narrower CDs than normal. .

owe Remarks.
Excessive time or energy during
exposure.

Excessive develop time or strength
of developer solution.

Incorrect process recipes during
exposure or develop steps.

2. Contamination.

. Particles and foreign

contamination on the resist
surface.

Equipment needs to be kept clean,
with special focus on the track
equipment.

Inadequate cleaning and rinsing of
waters.

Developer chemicals and rinse water
require point-of-use filters to remove
contaminants.

3. Surface defects.

. Scratches in the resist surface.

Wafer handling errors or tool
misadjustments related to cassette
indexers and robotic handling
systems.

. Particles, spots and stains.

Chamber exhaust flow, dispenser
alignment, dispense pressure, wafer
leveling, splashbacks, drips, spin
speed, are all possible contributors.

. Missing resist, extra resist, or

scumming.

Incorrect puddle time.

Incorrect dispense volume or
position.

Improper rinsing after the develop
process.

Improper or uneven baking.

. Striations in photoresist along

the sidewalls of the resist
features.

Standing waves or reflective notches
(unacceptable CD variation).

Improper or no antireflective coating
(ARC) was used.

4, Overlay registration.

A.

Improper alignment or

overlaying of one layer over »

a previous layer.

This is not a problem caused by the
develop process.

It is more likely a stepper-induced
problem.

Wrong process recipe or reticle
was used.

Poor temperature and humidity
control,


===== page_431 =====
TABLE 15.4 _Common n Develop Troubleshooting Problems

Photolithography: Photoresist Development and Advanced Lithography 431
DEVELOP TROUBLESHOOTING

Various troubleshooting problems encountered during develop are shown in Table 15.4.

1 “ Linewidths and holes

do not meet CD
requirements.

"Probable Cause

A Underdeveloped or
underexposed positive resist
across entire wafer.

~ Corrective Actions |

Ensure correct stepper process recipe

was used.

Check for insufficient exposure time
and energy settings.

Check stepper illuminator system.
Verify dose meter (light integrator) is
functioning properly.

Ensure correct recipe on developer
was used.

Check for insufficient puddle time
and quantity settings.

Check developer equipment.

Check bake temperatures.

B. Overdeveloped or overexposed
positive resist across entire
wafer.

Ensure correct stepper process recipe
was used.

Check for excessive exposure time
and energy settings.

Check stepper illuminator system.
Verify dose meter (light integrator) is
functioning properly.

Ensure correct recipe on developer
was used.

Check for excessive puddle time and
quantity settings.

Check developer equipment.

Check bake temperatures,

C. No measurable CDs.

Check exposure or develop
operation.
Check reticle or process recipe.

Wafer may have skipped coat,
expose, post-exposure bake, or
develop step.

Rework wafer.

2. Resist scumming.

A. Resist residue remains on
the wafer after the develop
operation is completed.

Check develop equipment process
recipe.

Verify puddle time and puddle
quantity are correct.

Check the rinser operation.

Check bake oven times and
temperatures.

Rework wafer.


===== page_432 =====
. . <Problem |. 9. ofa Probable Cause { re Corrective Actions ae .
3. Contamination and A. Possible causes may include the |* Verify puddle time and puddle
defects. ; chemicals, rinse water, and quantity are correct.
process chamber. * Clean the develop process chamber,
. then recheck a test wafer for further
contamination.

* Check, and if necessary, replace
line filters for the developer and
rinse water.

B. Misting or backsplashing ¢ Check chamber exhaust level.
from the dispenser can cause « Check alignment of dispenser
contamination. relative fo the wafer.

* Check for drips from dispenser
assembly.

¢ Rework wafer.

4. Collapsing of resist A. High aspect ratio (>5:1) will * Verify that the resist is not exces-

pattern after develop.

lead to collapsing of resist
lines.*

sively thick, since this will increase
the aspect ratio and make the resist
more likely to collapse.

Check that the resist has proper
adhesion to the wafer.

* The problem resolution may

require a material or process change
(e.g., more rigid resist).

5. Unacceptable CD A. Amine contamination of resist |* Check integrity of environmental

variation at top of
CA DUV resist profile.

after exposure.

chamber filtering system.

¢ Check to see if coated-wafers
may have been exposed to external
chemical contamination.

* Asses whether resist is best selection
for length of delay (newer resists
withstand a longer time before PEB).

*J. Yu, et al., “Analysis of Resist Pattern Collapse and Optimization of DUV Process for Patterning Sub-0.20 mm
Gate Line,” Advances in Resist Technology and Processing XV, Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 333, (Bellingham, WA:

SPIE, 1998): p. 880.

SUMMARY

Resist development removes those areas of the resist ren-
dered soluble by the exposure step. After exposure, a
post-exposure bake (PEB) is performed for chemically
amplified DUV resists to catalyze critical resist chemical
reactions. The temperature uniformity, duration, and time
delay for the PEB of DUV resist is important, For con-
ventional DNQ-novolak resist, a PEB drives out addi-
tional solvent for better adhesion and reduces the standing
wave effect, Negative resist development is mainly a sol-
vent wash of unexposed resist. The exposed negative re-
sist tends to swell during development, which limits its
use in submicron lithography. Positive resist develop-
ment involves a chemical reaction between the devel-
oper and the exposed resist, with parameters of develop
speed and selectivity. The most common positive-tone
developer is TMAH. The two most common develop-
ment methods are continuous spray and puddle, which
require the control of critical parameters for an optimum
process. Hard bake is a post-development thermal bake

used to drive out any residual solvent and harden the re-
sist. A post-develop inspection is performed to charac-
terize defects for corrective action and remove defective
wafers from the process before etch or implant.

Lithography improvements have produced sub-
wavelength lithography, where patterning achieves a CD
below the exposure light wavelength. Next-generation
lithography is evaluating the lithography technology for
eventually replacing optical lithography. There are four
primary alternatives: Extreme UV (EUV), SCALPEL,
ion projection lithography (IPL), and X-ray. EUV uses a
UV wavelength of about 13 nm to achieve a pattern res-
olution of 30 nm. SCALPEL uses an established elec-
tron beam for lithography. IPL uses ion beams to expose
resist. X-ray lithography projects X-rays with a wave-
length from about 0.1 to 10 nm onto a special mask to
pattern a resist. Top-surface imaging is a technique
usedto image only the top surface of the resist for re-
duced depth-of-focus and increased resolution.


===== page_484 =====
There are two major goals for sub-0.25 um doping requirements:

1. To introduce a uniform, controlled amount of a specific dopant into the wafer
2. To place the dopants at a desired depth.

Advantages of Ion Implant Mi The primary advantages of ion implantation are listed in
Table 17.5. These benefits effectively increase the process flexibility for fabricating wafers with
sub-quarter micron technology.

TABLE 17.5 Advantages of lon Implantation

"Advantages : cote be Description
1. Precise control of dopant Ability to precisely control the number of implanted dopants ‘over
concentration. a a wide range of concentrations, from 10!° to 10!” ions/cm?, and
controlled to within +2% over this range. In contrast, diffusion
can control dopant concentration to within 5 to 10% at high con-
centrations and becomes less effective at low concentrations.
2. Good dopant uniformity. Controls dopant uniformity by scanning the ion beam over a large
wafer area, which is critical for smaller feature sizes on larger
wafers.

3. Good control of dopant penetration | Controls the ion energy during the implant to achieve good
depth. control of dopant penetration depth. This permits design
flexibility, such as buried layers where the maximum dopant
concentration is at the buried layer and the minimum

concentration is at the wafer surface.

4. Produces a pure beam of ions. Mass separation techniques produce a pure beam of ions free
of contamination. Different impurities can be selected for
implantation. It is done in a high vacuum that minimizes
contaminants.

5. Low temperature processing. Implantation is performed at moderate temperatures (<125°C)
which permits the use of a variety of masks, including photoresist.

6. Ability to implant dopants through | Dopants can be implanted through films, such as an oxide or

films. nitride. This condition allows adjustment of the threshold voltage
of MOS transistors after the gate oxide is grown. It increases the
flexibility to implant at various stages of the process.

7. No solid solubility limit. The dopant concentration during implantation is not limited by the
solid solubility limit of the silicon wafer.

Disadvantages of Ion Implant Hi The major disadvantage of ion implantation is the damage
done to the crystal structure when the energetic dopant ions bombard the silicon host atoms. As the
high-energy ions enter the crystal and collide with substrate atoms, energy is transferred and some
silicon atoms are displaced from the lattice. This action is referred to as radiation damage. Most or
all of this crystal damage is corrected with a high-temperature anneal step.

Another drawback of implantation is the complexity of the implanter equipment. However,
this drawback is offset by the implanter’s capability for dose and depth control and overall process
flexibility.

Jon Implant Parameters

Ion implant is a flexible process that must meet stringent chip design and productivity requirements
for wafer fabrication. The important ion implant parameters are:

@ Dose

@ Range

Dose M The dose (Q) is the number of implanted ions per unit area of wafer surface, with units
of atoms/cm? (also stated as ions/cm?). To count the implanted ions, Q is calculated by the follow-
ing dose equation:


===== page_485 =====
It
Q= GA

Where, Q = dose in atom/cm2
1 = beam current in coulombs/sec (amperes)
t = implant time in seconds
e = electronic charge equal to 1.6 X 10°}? coulombs
n = charge per ion (for instance, B* is equal to 1)
A = area implanted in cm?

One of the main reasons why ion implantation is so important in wafer fabrication is its abil-
ity to repeatedly put the same dose into each wafer. The implanter does this by virtue of the posi-
tive charge on each ion. When formed into a beam, the flux of positive dopant ions represents a
beam current measured in milliamps (mA). A low-to-medium beam current is from less than
0.1 mA up to about 10 mA, while a high beam current is from about 10 mA up to approximately
25 mA. As seen in the equation above, the magnitude of the beam current is a Key variable for defin-
ing the dose. If the beam current increases, then more dopant atoms are implanted per unit time. A
high beam current is often desirable to increase wafer throughput (more ions are implanted per unit
time of production), but can also create uniformity problems.

Range Mi The ion range is the total distance an ion travels in the silicon during ion implantation.
To characterize range it is necessary to understand energy. When the ions are accelerated due to
electric potential difference to a high velocity, they gain energy. The ion energy is kinetic energy
(KE) due to its motion, and it typically is expressed in units of joules. However, for ion implanta-
tion, the energy is usually stated in terms of the number of the electronic charge times the differ-
ence in potential, or electron volts (eV). The equation that describes this energy is:

KE = nV

Where, KE = energy in electron volts (eV)
n = charge state of the ion (e.g., “+” = 1, “++” = 2)
V = voltage difference in volts

For example, if an ion with a single positive-charge state moves in an electric field with a
voltage difference of 100,000 volts (100kV), then its energy is:

KE = nV
= (1)(100kV)
= 100 keV

Higher implanter energy means the dopant atom will have an increased range and travel
deeper into the wafer, Energy is important in implanters because of the need to control the range
and, therefore, junction depth of the dopants. High-energy implanters have an energy greater than
200 keV and may be as high as 2 to 3 MeV. High-energy implant is used in applications such as
deep retrograde wells and retrograde triple wells (see Table 17.6 on page 486). A retrograde well .
has higher doping concentrations deeper in the well than at the surface. Ultralow-energy implanters
have energies presently down to about 200 eV to enable doping at very shallow depths for
source/drain applications.”

There is a projected range, R,, which is how far the implanted ions travel into the wafer, de-
pending on the ion mass and energy, the target mass and the beam direction with respect to the
wafer crystal structure (see Figure 17.7 on page 486).° At the same time, not all ions come to stop
simply at the projected range; some stop at a shorter distance and others at a greater distance. Ions
will also move in a lateral direction. Combining all these ion movements produces a distribution of
distances traveled by the dopant atoms implanted in the wafer, referred to as straggle, or AR,. The
R,, (projected range) indicates how shallow or deep the junction depth can be formed, whereas the
A ? (sttaggle) represents the spread of the implanted species around R.. As the implant energy of


===== page_486 =====
TABLE 17.6 Classes of implanters
— Classof eo
_ Implanter System , rn en re ee

Low/Medium Current * Highly pure beam ¢ currents < <10 mA.

¢ Beam energy is usually <180 keV.
© Most often the ion beam is stationary and the wafer is scanned.

¢ Specialized applications of punchthrough stops.

High Current ¢ Generate beam currents >10 mA and up to 25 mA for high dose im-
plants.

¢ Beam energy is usually <120 keV.

* Most often the wafer is stationary and the ion beam does the scan-
ning.

* Ultralow energy beams (<4keV down to 200 eV) for implanting ul-
trashallow source/drain junctions.

High Energy ¢ Beam energy exceeds 200 keV up to several MeV.
* Place dopants beneath a trench or thick oxide layer.

¢ Able to form retrograde wells and buried layers.

Oxygen Ion Implanters * Class of high current systems used to implant oxygen in silicon-on-
insulator (SOT) applications.

Incident
ion beam

Silicon substrate
ARp dopant
. : distribution
Stopping point
for a single ion

FIGURE 17.7 Range and Projected Range of Dopant lon

dopant atoms increases, the projected range increases but the peak concentration of dopants de-
creases because the range straggling increases. Projected range charts are available that predict the
projected range for a given implant energy (see Figure 17.8).

The implanted ions will travel some depth into the target wafer before they are brought to rest
by energy loss due to collisions with silicon atoms (see Figure 17.9). The two primary energy loss
mechanisms are electronic stopping and nuclear stopping.” Electronic stopping of dopant atoms is
caused by interactions with the target electrons, similar to stopping a projectile in a thick medium,
such as a child jumping into a pile of plastic balls. Nuclear stopping of implanted ions is caused by
collisions between atoms that cause a displacement of silicon atoms. It can be visualized as the col-
lision between two hard spheres, such as billiard balls. Depending on the ion mass and energy, an
implanted atom can displace as many as 10* silicon atoms by nuclear collisions before coming
to rest.!0

The dopant moving through the silicon atoms creates a damage path in the crystal lattice, with
the nature of the damage depending on whether the dopant ion is light or heavy (see Figure 17.10).
A light dopant atom glances off silicon atoms with little energy transfer and is deflected through a
large scattering angle. A heavy ion has a large energy transfer each time it strikes a silicon atom and
is deflected through a relatively small scattering angle. Each displaced silicon atom also produces
a large number of displacements.


===== page_487 =====
1.0

Implanting
into Silicon

Li til

L

|

Projected Range,R, (um)
| LJ ib tii
ING

0.1

0.01 T T TTTNT en es
10 100 10,000
Implantation Energy (keV)

FIGURE 17.8 Projected Range Chart for Implant Energy
Redrawn from B. El-Kareh, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Processing Technologies, (Boston:
Kluwer, 1995), p. 388.

Energetic
dopant ion
Silicon crystal lattice

X-rays

(2)
@
@

Heavy ion impact

FIGURE 17.10 Crystal Damage Due to Light and Heavy lons

ton Implant 487


===== page_92 =====
) 0

Solid Liquid Gas Plasma
FIGURE 5.1 Physica! States of Matter

without forming a surface. Gas particles are small and freely moving. Some gases, like hydrogen
and oxygen, are reactive and easily form stable chemical compounds with other gases or elements.
Other gases, like helium and argon, are inert. An inert gas (also called a noble gas) does not read-
ily form compounds. Inert gases are widely used in semiconductor manufacturing because they do
not react with other chemicals.

A fourth state of matter is plasma. A plasma state exists when there is a high-energy collec-
tion of ionized molecules or atoms. This state is considerably different than the three basic states of
matter. Examples of a plasma state are a star, a fluorescent light, and neon signs. Plasma states can
be induced in certain gases through exposure to high-energy electric fields. As we shall see in later
chapters, plasma states are widely used in semiconductor manufacturing.

Many substances can exist in any one of the three basic physical states. For example, water
undergoes changes of state depending on the temperature and pressure of its surroundings. As tem-
perature increases, solid water (ice) melts to a liquid water, and then boils into a gas state (water
vapor). Many substances behave in this same manner.

PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS

We can understand how to use materials to our benefit in semiconductor manufacturing by investi-
gating their properties. Properties are the characteristics of a material that describe its unique iden-
tity. For instance, a solid material can have different properties, such as a rigid solid (iron), a soft
solid (wax) at room temperature (25°C, 77°F) and a flexible solid (lead). Identifying properties for
materials used in semiconductor manufacturing is important for understanding how to properly fab-
ricate the silicon wafer to build chips.

There are two types of material properties: physical and chemical. Physical properties of a
material are those that reflect a material by itself without its interacting with another substance.
Some of these physical properties are the melting point, boiling point, resistivity, and density.
Chemical properties of a material result from an interaction or transformation with another sub-
stance. Examples of chemical properties are flammability, reactivity, and corrosiveness. A chemical
reaction occurs when a material is converted into a different material that has a different composi-
tion and properties. The starting material is called a reactant, and the resultant material is called a
product.

An example of a chemical reaction is the combustion of hydrogen in the presence of oxygen.
Both chemicals exist as gases in their natural state. Hydrogen will undergo a chemical reaction with
oxygen when the temperature of hydrogen exceeds 600°C. The result is an explosive heat reaction
with water vapor as the byproduct. The chemical change is: ,

2 parts of hydrogen (gas) + oxygen (gas) Heat water (liquid) + energy


===== page_95 =====
Atmosphere Atmosphere

psi
; Gauge Pressure Absolute Pressure
FIGURE 5.4 Gauge Pressure (PSIG) Versus Absolute Pressure (PSIA)
TABLE 5.1 Units of Pressure at Sea Level and 23°C
. Unit of Pressure _ Sea Level and 23°C
Psig (gauge) 0 psi
Psia (absolute) 14.7 psi
Atmosphere 14.7 psi ,
Inches of mercury 29.92 inches
Millimeters of mercury 760 mm
Torr 760 torr
mtorr 760,000 mtorr
Bar 1.013 bar
millibar 1013 mbar
Pascal 101,325 pascal

Pressure is a widely used property in semiconductor manufacturing. Chemicals and gases
flow from regions of higher pressure to lower pressure. Some fabrication processes occur at
atmospheric pressure, while some require higher pressures. Other processes occur in chambers
at less than atmospheric pressure (vacuum).

Vacuum, If the gas pressure in a container is less than 14.7 psi, then a vacuum exists.
Vacuum is the removal of gas molecules (e.g., air, moisture, and gas residues) in a closed container
to achieve a pressure less than atmosphere. Many semiconductor operations occur in vacuum con-
ditions. Vacuum is commonly measured in units of torr. A torr is defined as the equivalent of one
mim of mercury in a pressure-measuring device known as a barometer (see Figure 5.5 on page 96).

At one atmosphere, the weight of the air will push down on the mercury in the bowl and cause
it to rise 760 mm (760 tort or 29.92 inches) in the vacuum of the column. The amount of mercury
rise is proportional to the pressure bearing down on the mercury in the dish. Less pressure (or
vacuum) makes the mercury rise less. For the sensitivity required to measure and control vacuum
conditions in many semiconductor processes, the units of millitorr are required.

Condensation and Vaporization HM The process of a gas changing into a liquid is called con-
densation. When water vapor cools, a mist appears as the particles form tiny droplets of liquid that
then collect into a bulk sample with a single surface. The opposite process, changing from a liquid
into a gas, is called vaporization.

Liquids and gases interact with materials in different ways. Absorption is the taking up of a
liquid or a gas into the bulk of another material, as in the dissolving of a gas in a liquid. Adsorption
is the condensing of a gas or a liquid on the surface of a solid. The adsorbed molecules actually
stick to the surface through a chemical bond or through a weaker bond of physical attraction.

Vapor Pressure Ml Vapor pressure is the pressure exerted by vapor in a closed container when
there is an equilibrium condition between the rate of vaporization and rate of condensation. Vapor
pressure is shown in Figure 5.6 on page 96.


===== page_98 =====
TABLE 5.2 Densities of Some Common Substances at Standard Temperature and Pressure

Substance Physical State Density (g/cm?)
Hydrogen ‘Gas 0.000089
Oxygen Gas : 0.0014
Water Liquid , 1.0
Table salt Solid 2.16
Silicon Solid 2.33
Aluminum Solid 2.70
Gold Solid 19.3

A term related to density is specific gravity. Specific gravity (SG) refers to-the density of liq-
uids and gases at 4°C and is the ratio of the density of a substance to the density of water.

Surface Tension Mi When a liquid is on a flat surface, it has a surface area of contact (see Figure
5.10). The surface tension of the liquid is the energy required to increase the surface area of con-
tact. For the surface area to increase, liquid molecules must break intermolecular attraction forces
and move away from the interior of the liquid and toward its surface. This movement requires en-
ergy. The concept of surface tension is used in semiconductor manufacturing to measure the ability
of liquid coatings to uniformly adhere to the wafer surface.

Low surface tension High surface tension

FIGURE 5.10 Surface Tension of a Liquid on a Wafer

Thermal Expansion M When an object is heated, it expands due to the increased vibrations of
the atoms. Due to this thermal expansion, the dimensions of a heated object will actually increase
(see Figure 5.11). When the same object is cooled, its dimensions will decrease.

Some materials will expand thermally more than others. The amount a material expands due
to heating is known as its coefficient of thermal expansion, or CTE. Amorphous materials that have
a cubic crystal orientation expand to thermal exposure in all directions. For all other crystals, such
as monocrystal silicon, thermal expansion varies with the type of crystal orientation.

Thermometer

FIGURE 5.11 Thermal Expansion of a Heated Object (

Stress If Stress occurs when an object is exposed to a force. The magnitude of the stress depends
on two factors: the amount of force, and the area over which the force is applied. The units of stress
are pounds per square inch (psi) or pascal (Pa) in the metric system. The formula for stress is,

€

< (psi)
a

For
Stress =

The force that creates stress in a wafer can come from various sources. Stress can come from
work damage on the surface of the wafer; from internal forces due to dislocations, excess vacancies
and impurities; and from growth around included foreign material.” If two dissimilar materials with
significantly different coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) are bonded together and heated, then


===== page_99 =====
a force occurs because the two materials expand at different rates and pull against each other to
cause a stress. This stress can create a warped wafer due to the CTE mismatch. Such stress is a con-
cern in semiconductor manufacturing because a microchip is a planar structure with layers of dif-
ferent materials with different CTEs. Deposited films usually have some form of stress that can be
compressive or tensile, and the nature of the stress depends on process conditions (see Figure 5.12).
The reliability of a chip is improved by ensuring materials have minimal stress.

Deposited film

CTE of deposited material
Substrate equals CTE of substrate

(a)

Compressive F ~ High CTE material
stress Low CTE material

(b)

4 Low CTE material

Tensile stress ;
4} High CTE material

()
FIGURE 5.12 CTE Mismatch of Two Materials

PROCESS CHEMICALS

Semiconductor manufacturing is a chemically intensive process involving many different types of
process chemicals of ultrahigh purity. The process chemicals are used in all three states: liquids,
solids, and gases. Chemicals are used in the process of manufacturing semiconductors to:

@ Clean or prepare the wafer surface with wet chemical solutions and ultrapure water rinse.
@ Dope the wafer with energetic atoms to create p-type and n-type silicon.

@ Deposit the different metal conductor layers and the necessary dielectric layers between the
conductors.

@ Grow the thin silicon dioxide film to be used as the critical MOS gate dielectric.

@ Etch thin films with plasma or wet chemicals to selectively remove material and form the
required pattern in the film.

There is a vast array of chemicals used in the fab, yet some predominant chemicals are
repeatedly used in the different process areas of the fab. Cleaning is one of the most chemically
intense steps of semiconductor manufacturing. It is estimated that 30% of all processing steps in
the wafer fabrication process are for wafer cleaning or wafer surface preparation.?

Liquids

Liquids can be either a pure substance, such as pure water, or a chemical mixture. Automotive
gasoline is an example of a chemical mixture of hydrocarbons and additives blended together
to produce efficient combustion.

If a chemical mixture is so well mixed that the molecules or ions of the components are the
same throughout, then we call this a chemical solution. Gasoline is a chemical solution. Another ex-
ample of a solution is the household first aid antiseptic hydrogen peroxide, which consists mostly
of water, with only 5% hydrogen peroxide. The component of the solution present in the larger
amount (such as water in the hydrogen peroxide solution) is called the solvent. The dissolved sub-
stances in the solution are the solutes. Solutions in water are called aqueous solutions, meaning
water is the solvent. '

There are many types of liquids used in the wet processes of semiconductor manufacturing.

All liquids used in wafer fabs must have extremely high purity, with no contamination from
particulates, metallic ions, or unwanted chemicals. Contamination of chemicals is a relative


===== page_307 =====
1. Copper diffuses quickly into oxides and silicon. This is a concern if copper diffuses into the
active region of the silicon (i.e., source/drain/gate region of the transistor) because it will
damage the device by creating junction or oxide leakage.

2. Copper cannot be easily patterned using regular plasma etching techniques (see Chapter 16
for a discussion of etching). Copper dry etching does not produce a volatile by-product dur-
ing the chemical reaction that is necessary for economical dry etching.

3. Copper oxidizes quickly in air at low temperatures (<200°C) and does not form a protective
layer to stop further oxidation.

These challenges are addressed by converting to dual damascene processing with special bar-
rier metals optimized for copper. Damascene processing eliminates the need to etch copper.
Furthermore, tungsten plugs are expected to be used as the first level of metal to contact the source,
drain, and gate regions.”! This use of tungsten overcomes the concern of copper contaminating the sil-
icon (referred to as copper poisoning). The tungsten may even be patterned for wiring of the local in-
terconnect (LI). All other metal lines and vias for the multiple metal layers are expected to be copper.

Another major hindrance to converting to copper in semiconductor manufacturing is the nat-
ural reluctance to introducing new materials into production. New materials means there are new
sources of contamination, new equipment and procedures, unpredictable results, and so on. Change
always brings unforeseen problems that pose increased risks to the semiconductor manufacturer.
However, these risks are balanced by the benefits from changing the interconnect material in order
to improve IC performance.

Barrier Metals

A more effective way to make reliable ohmic contacts to shallow junctions without material diffu-
sion or problems such as junction spiking is to use barrier metallization. A barrier metal is a thin
layer of deposited metal or metals that is designed to prevent intermixing of the materials above and
below the barrier (see Figure 12.7). The thickness of barrier metals has typically been around 100
nm for features sizes in the 0.25-.m generation, which is substantially thinner than the 400 to 600
nm thickness required for 0.35-~.m generation of devices. Thickness of barrier metals is projected
to decrease to 23 nm or less for the 0.18-jm technology node and beyond.22

Barrier metal

FIGURE 12.7 Barrier Layer for Copper Interconnect Structure

Barrier metals are widely used in semiconductor manufacturing. For contacts between the
tungsten (W) plug that connects the aluminum interconnect wiring and the silicon source/drains, the
barrier metal prevents the silicon and W from coming into contact with each other. This barrier pre-
vents diffusion between the W and silicon and any junction spiking.

The essential properties of an acceptable barrier layer metal are:

1, Good diffusion barrier properties so that the diffusivity of the two interface materials (e.g.,
tungsten and silicon) is low at the sintering temperature (sintering refers to joining the mate-
rials by thermal means).

2. High electrical conductivity with low ohmic contact resistance.
3. Good adhesion between the semiconductor and the metal.


===== page_308 =====
4. Resistance to electromigration.
5. Stability when thin and at high temperature.
6. Resistance to corrosion and oxidation.

Metals commonly used for barrier metals are a class of high melting point metals known as
refractory metals. Common refractory metals used in multilevel metallization for wafer fabrication
are titanium (Ti), tungsten (W), tantalum (Ta), molybdenum (Mo), cobalt (Co), and platinum (Pt).
Refractory metals have been used in wafer fabrication since the 1960s, such as in the formation of
Schottky barrier diodes in bipolar processes. The benefits of using titanium as a barrier metal for
aluminum alloy wiring are improved adhesion, reduced contact resistance, reduced stress, and con-
trolled electromigration. To achieve good barrier properties, wafers undergo a clean step (referred
to as sputter etch and explained in a later section) before deposition in the processing chamber to
remove native oxides and oxide residues on the wafer.

Titanium tungsten (TiW) and titanium nitride (TiN) are two common barrier metal layers that
inhibit diffusion between the silicon substrate and aluminum. TiN is widely used in ULSI manu-
facturing for its superior barrier performance in aluminum alloy interconnect processing. TiN
functions as a barrier metal for both tungsten and aluminum. TIN is also widely used as an antire-
flective coating on aluminum to improve the photolithography patterning process (see Chapter 14).
However, TiN does not produce good contact resistance to silicon. To resolve this problem, a thin
layer of titanium (e.g., several hundred angstroms or less) is typically deposited before the TiN so
that it can react with the underlying material as a silicide (see the following section for an expla-
nation of silicide) and lower the contact resistance. The Ti and TiN are typically deposited in a clus-
ter tool to keep oxides from forming between the two layers.

Copper Barrier Metals Ml Barrier metals are critical for copper metallurgy. Cu has high diffu-
sivity in silicon and silicon dioxide, which will destroy device performance. Traditional barrier met-
als are not sufficient barriers for copper. Cu requires complete encapsulation by a thin-film barrier
layer that functions as an adhesion promoter and effective diffusion barrier? There is a trade-off
between these two requirements since good adhesion requires some reaction with Cu, whereas a
good barrier metal should not react with Cu. The special barrier metal requirements for copper
are:24

Prevent copper diffusion.

. Low film resistivity.

Good adhesion to both dielectric material and copper.
Compatible with chemical mechanical planarization (CMP).

wR wy o

Metal layer is continuous and conformal with good step coverage and deposition in high
aspect ratio gaps.
6. Minimal thickness to allow the copper to occupy the maximum cross-sectional area.

For Cu interconnect metallurgy, tantalum (Ta), tantalum nitride (TaN), and tantalum silicon
nitride (TaSiN) are candidate materials for barrier metals (see Figure 12.8). The diffusion barrier
must remain thin (about 75 A) so that it does not affect the resistivity of the high-aspect ratio plug
while still acting as a barrier metal. This condition is difficult to maintain as geometries continue to
shrink and metals are deposited into high-aspect ratio vias. Research has shown Ta has good bar-
rier and adhesion properties for copper, whereas TiN, a traditional barrier metal for Al/SiO₂ inter-
connects, has good barrier properties but poorer adhesion.” If TaN is used, it is obtained by small
amounts of nitrogen doping or by deposition with a tantalum nitride compound. Investigations have
also shown tungsten nitride (WN) functions as an effective barrier for Cu metal.2° There is ongo-
ing research in the development of barrier metals for Cu metallurgy.

Copper barrier layers can be deposited by using high-density plasma CVD (HDPCVD) or
ionized metal plasma physical vapor deposition. Ionized metal plasma PVD for tantalum achieves
good step coverage. For deposition with high-aspect ratio gaps, then HDPCVD barrier deposition
is often the choice.?’


===== page_309 =====
Tantalum ‘
/- Copper

Z |

Ml

FIGURE 12.8 Ta for Copper Barrier Metal

Silicides

Refractory metals react with silicon when alloyed together to form a silicide. A silicide is a metal
compound that is thermally stable and provides for low electrical resistivity at the silicon/refractory
metal interface (see Figure 12.9). Refractory metal silicides are important in wafer fabrication be-
cause of the need to reduce the electrical resistance of the many silicon contacts in the source/drain

and gate regions for chip performance, Titanium and cobalt are common refractory metal used for
contacts in aluminum interconnect technology.

Titanium silicide (polycide) contact Titanium/titanium-nitride

barrier metal

Polysilicon gate

Tungsten metal

Silicon substrate \

\ nium silicide contact

FIGURE 12.9 Refractory Metal Silicide at a Silicon Contact

If the refractory metal is reacted with polysilicon, it is called a polycide (see Figure 12.10 on
page 310). Doped polysilicon is used as the gate electrode and has a relatively high resistivity
(about 500 .0-cm), which leads to an undesirable RC signal delay. A polycide is beneficial for re-
ducing the series resistance of an interconnection to polysilicon. At the same time, it maintains
polysilicon’s good interfacial characteristics to oxides.

Silicides improve contact resistance by reducing residual oxides on the silicon surface during
silicide formation. Silicides form extremely good metallurgic contact to the silicon, serving as a crit-
ical adhesion layer between the contact metal and the silicon junction regions. Many silicides are sta-
ble at temperatures exceeding 1000°C with a relatively high eutectic temperature. Table 12.4 on page
310 lists some properties of common silicides used in wafer fabrication.”® Recall that the eutectic
temperature is the lowest temperature where the alloy melts. It is undesirable for the silicide to melt
because the liquid alloy can extend into the substrate material and cause junction spiking.


===== page_310 =====
Titanium polycide

Polysilicon gate
\ Titanium silicide

Doped silicon _/

FIGURE 12.10 Polycide on Polysilicon

TABLE 12.4 Some Properties of Select Silicides

‘Silicide” ~ < " Lowest Eutectic Typical Forming ~ .
fe “ , Temperature . ‘Temperature* —_ . (
Cobalt/silicon (CoSi,) 900. 550-700 319
Molybdenum/silicon (MoSi,) 1410 900-1100 40-70
Platinum/silicon (PtSi) 830 700-800 28-35
Tantalum/silicon (TaSi,) 1385 900-1100 35-55
Titanium/silicon (TiSiy) 1330 600-800 13-17
Tungsten/silicon (WSi,) 1440 900-1100 31

* B, El-Kareh, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Processing Technologies, (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishing
1995), p. 537.

Silicide formation typically requires the refractory metal be deposited on the silicon wafer,
followed by a high temperature thermal anneal process to produce the silicide material. In areas
where there is silicon, the metal reacts to form a silicide. In other areas on the wafer surface, such
as where there is SiO₂, there is little or no silicide formation. Often this thermal anneal step uses a
rapid thermal anneal (RTA) process in a multichamber cluster tool.

TiSi, has traditionally been the most common contact silicide for wafer fabrication, serving
as the contact between the transistor active regions of silicon and the tungsten plug. It is often re-
ferred to as the glue that holds the tungsten to the silicon. Its beneficial properties are high temper-
ature stability, compatibility with self-aligned contact processing (discussed in the following
section), low resistivity when compared to other silicides, and its compatibility with TiN barrier
metals.”? TiSi, forms two different grain phases (a phase is a physically homogeneous material
state) as it is annealed, a low-temperature C49 phase and a high-temperature C54 phase (see Figure
12.11). Both of these phases are TiSi,.

The C49 phase of TiSi, forms at an anneal temperature of 625 to 675°C with a resistivity
of 60 to 65 wO-cm. The C54 phase is formed in a second anneal following the C49 phase forma-
tion and requires a temperature of 800°C or more. It has a much lower resistivity of only 10 to
15 .Q-cm, which is desirable to lower the overall contact resistance,29

However, at the time of this writing, TiSi, appears limited in its future use as a contact sili-
cide in sub-0.25 jm technologies. Contacts for ultrashallow source/drain junctions are becoming
thin. TiSi, is undesirable for thin contacts because the silicide resistivity increases.>! It is also dif-
ficult to form this contact during the second anneal because of critical time at temperature
requirements.

The silicide that appears promising for the 0.18 j2m and below technology nodes is cobalt
silicide (CoSi,). This silicide maintains a reduced contact resistance of 13 to 19 4O-cm after its


===== page_311 =====
Sintering Resistivity
Temperature
TiSi,— C49
— 625 —675°C 60-65 1Q-crm
TiSi,—C54
Bo g00°C 10-15 pQ-cm

FIGURE 12.11 Anneal Phases of TiSi,

anneal operation, even with deep submicron geometries of 0.18 um and less. This reduced resis-
tivity occurs because the grain size of CoSi, is about ten times smaller than the grain size of TiSi,.
Therefore, the low resistance phase is completely nucleated and grown during the thermal anneal
operation. A CoSi, contact is also easier to form because of the smaller grain size.

Note that a silicide is not a barrier metal. In some silicides it is found that silicon diffuses rap-
idly through them. This diffusion occurs during heat treatment of the metal-silicide-silicon system
where silicon diffuses through the silicide to the metal, which then reduces the integrity of the
system. The solution to this problem is to place a metal barrier layer between the silicide and the
metallization layer (discussed in the preceding section). A common silicide barrier film is titanium
nitride (TiN), which is effective for both tungsten and aluminum. A tantalum-based barrier layer is
anticipated for copper metallurgy. ‘

Salicide Ml Because of the need to scale device sizes in VLSI and ULSI to optimize performance,
the cross-sectional area of the source/drain (S/D) contact between the silicon and the first metal
layer is small. This small size leads to increased resistance. A technique to decrease contact resist-
ance at the source and drain areas by providing stable contact structures is referred to as a salicide.
A salicide approach (taken from the expression self-aligned silicide) is used to create silicides that
are properly aligned with the exposed silicon of the source, drain, and polysilicon gate. There are
numerous chip performance issues that depend on salicide formation (see Figure 12.12).

The basic salicide steps are shown in Figure 12.13 on page 312. This process flow corre-
sponds to Step 6 of the CMOS process flow described in Chapter 9. To form a salicide, oxide has
been previously deposited and etched back with a dry plasma etch to leave oxide sidewall spacers

Reduced gate to

Reduced sheet resistance. S/D resistance

\ Reduced contact resistance NS Reduced diode leakage

FIGURE 12.12 Chip Performance Issues Related to a Salicide Structure


===== page_312 =====
on the side of the polysilicon gate (Step 5 of the CMOS process flow described in Chapter 9). With
the sidewall spacers, only the top poly surface of the gate is exposed. After an HF-dip clean step to
remove native oxides, a 250 to 350 A thin layer of titanium metal is deposited on the wafer. The re-
fractory metal undergoes an RTP rapid anneal at 600 to 800°C to create the high-resistivity C49 ti-
tanium silicide phase wherever the refractory metal contacts silicon. The sidewall spacer keeps the
S/D TiSi, from shorting out to the sides of the gate poly, while the oxide of the shallow trench iso-
lation separates the devices. After the first RTP anneal, all unreacted titanium is removed by a wet’
chemical etch in ammonium hydroxide (NH₄OH) and hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂). TiSi, remains
and covers the S/D areas and top surface of the poly gate. A second RTP silicide anneal at 800 to
900°C creates the low-resistivity C54 metallic silicide. A major benefit of the salicide process is the
avoidance of alignment tolerances that would occur if patterning were required to align the refrac-
tory metal on the silicon contact. Care must be taken during the anneal steps to avoid oxygen
contamination in the furnace tube. Titanium reacts easily with oxygen to form undesirable titanium
oxides. This oxide contamination can promote silicide formation on top of the oxide spacer regions,
leading to a short between the polysilicon gate and source or drain.

— Spacer oxide
Field oxide

Polysilicon

Active
silicon
region

Silicon substrate

1. Active silicon regions 2. Titanium deposition

Titanium-silicon

u c TiSiy
reaction regions

formation

3. Rapid thermal anneal treatment 4, Titanium strip
FIGURE 12.13 Formation of Self-Aligned Metal Silicide (Salicide)

Metal Plugs

Multilevel metallization creates the need for billions of vias filled with metal plugs to form electri-
cal pathways between two metal layers. A contact plug is also used to connect the silicon devices
in the wafer to the first level of metallization. The most common metal currently used for plugs
is tungsten (W), which is why plugs are often referred to as tungsten plugs (see Figure 12.14).
Tungsten has been traditionally used as a plug material because of its ability to uniformly fill the
high-aspect ratio vias when deposited by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods. Tungsten is
resistant to electromigration failure. It also serves as a barrier to inhibit diffusion and reaction be-
tween Si and the first metal layer. Tungsten is a refractory material with a melting point of 3,417°C
and a bulk resistivity of 52.8 wQ-cm at 20°C.

Aluminum would be desirable as a plug material because of its lower resistivity (2.65 »O-cm
at 20°C), but sputtered aluminum cannot fill high-aspect ratio vias (see the next section for a
description of sputtering). For this reason aluminum is used as the interconnect material and
tungsten is limited to the plug. There has been recent interest in reflow aluminum plugs, where
aluminum is sputter deposited into the via and then reflowed by a high-temperature anneal with a
rapid thermal processor (RTP).32


===== page_329 =====
METALLIZATION QUALITY MEASURES

Wafer fabrication quality measures for metallization are provided in Table 12.6.

TABLE 12. 6 Quality Measures for Metallization

1 Sputtered metal adhesion.

\ Types of. Defects '

A, Metal layer does not adhere
to substrate.

Remarks _

Parameters affecting film

adhesion are:

¢ Wafer contamination

* Stress

* Types of materials

* Temperature of substrate
¢ Argon pressure

2. Sputtered film stress.

A, Excessive stress leads to:
¢ Cracks in the film surface.
¢ Loss of film adhesion.
* Increased resistivity in
some materials,

Film stress can be caused by
excessive temperature of the
wafer substrate, Ways to
reduce wafer temperature are:
¢ Lower deposition rate

* Increased backside cooling
Cracks can cause:

* Peeling of the film layer

* Contaminant migration

¢ Electrical opens or short.
Measure film stress (bow of
wafer surface) before and after
deposition. Units for stress are

dynes.
3. Sputtered film thickness, A. Metal layer does not meet film| Parameters that affect film
thickness specifications thickners are:

(e.g., sheet resistance out of
specification).

* Incorrect recipe

* Improper flow rates

* Improper substrate temperature
¢ Improper chamber pressure

* Improper power supply energy
¢ Wrong time setting

4. Uniformity of electroplated
(electrochemical deposition,
or ECD) metal film.

A. Nonuniform film thickness

indicated by:

° Inadequate gap fill and step

coverage for high aspect

ratio openings (nonuniform
metal thickness at top and
bottom of high aspect

ratio holes).

* Nonuniform deposition
thickness across the wafer
and from wafer to wafer.

Voids in film.

Critical parameters for
electroplating film uniformity
are:

* Depositing a uniform CVD
seed layer without voids.

* Maintaining proper
electroplating bath
chemistry (composition
and concentration)
for organic additives,
primarily brighteners and
suppressors, to attain
void-free deposition that
fills bottom and sidewalls
of gaps,

329


===== page_330 =====
METALLIZATION TROUBLESHOOTING

Common troubleshooting problems for metallization are provided in Table 12.7.

TABLE 12.7 Common Metallization Troubleshooting Problems

’ Problem

1. Degradation in step coverage
of metal film.

. Probable Cause

A. Decrease in substrate
temperature. For Al alloy
sputter deposition, step
coverage is dependent on the
wafer temperature during
deposition.

Corrective Actions.
Heating the substrate to improve
step coverage because surface

mobility of deposited metal
atoms improves.

B. Increase in deposition rate.

Decrease deposition rate.
Increase in sputter deposition
rate may degrade step
coverage due to reduced
surface mobility because of
arrival of more atoms at
surface.

2. Vacuum chamber integrity.

A. Chamber cleanliness or
moisture in chamber,

* Check for vacuum leaks
or chamber outgassing. Residual
gas in chamber that can change
film reflectivity.

| * Check for O, or N, in metal

films that can change resistivity
and film stress.

* Clean chamber and do H₂O
bake-out.

B. Outgassing or system leaks.

* Use helium leak detection to
inspect for system leaks.

« Assess the chamber conditions
before deposition with residual
gas analyzer.

3. Contamination of metal film.

A. Particles on surface of film.

Check the following common
particle sources:

¢ Dirty input wafers.

¢ Problems in hand-off between
robot and chamber mechanism.

* Incomplete chamber cleaning
between runs.

¢ Dirty cassettes.

¢ Contaminated nitrogen backfill.

4. Voids in copper trench fill
after dual-damascene
electroplating.

A. Excessive seed layer thickness
on the wafer surface (field)
that pinches off the via or
trench, creating a center void
in the film.*

Optimize the CVD Cu seed layer
deposition by evaluating the
electroplating current from the
field to the bottom of vias and
trenches. The goal is to deposit
adequate seed layer at the bottom
of a high-aspect ratio feature
without increasing field thickness.

5. Excessive copper dishing
after dual-damascene CMP.

A. Cu dishing for Cu CMP is
often caused by tantalum
diffusion barrier, which
must be polished back in
the presence of Cu.**

After Cu is polished, the Ta

layer must be removed from the

fevel. The Cu pad/slurry field does

not effectively remove Ta.

Options are:

* Optimize the pad/slurry for Ta.

* Minimize the Ta field level
thickness.

* R, Jackson et al., “Processing and Integration of Copper Interconnects,” Solid State Technology (March 1998):

p. 56.
*# Thid.
